ww

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
(Appellate Jurisdiction)

PRESENT:

Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan

Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail
Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik

CIVIL APPEAL NO.408 OF 2022
[Against judgment dated 31.01.2022 passed by the Lahore High Court,

_ Rawalpindi Bench, Rawalpindi in CR No.60-D of 2014]

Pervaiz Akhtar .. Appellant(s)
Versus

Mst. Farida Bibi and others ...Respondent(s)

For the Appellant(s) : Mr. Muhammad Munir Paracha, ASC

For Respondent Nos.1&2  : Sardar Muhammad Ashfaq Abbasi,

(LRs) ASC

For Respondent No.3 : Nemo

Date of Hearing : 18.04.2023
JUDGMENT

AYESHA A. MALIK, J.- This Civil Appeal arises out of
judgment dated 31.01.2022 passed by the Lahore High Court,
Rawalpindi Bench, Rawalpindi (High Court) whereby the civil revision
filed by Respondent Nos.1 and 2 was allowed.

Zs The basic contention of the Appellant is that he purchased
property bearing Khewat No.530 Khatooni Nos.813 to 815, Khasra
Nos.112, 113/1, 113/2, 122, 115, 103, 114, 116, 121, 117, 123, Qitat
11 situated in village Sehr Bagla, Tehsil Murree, District Rawalpindi
(suit property) from Respondent No.3, who was the General Power of
Attorney (GPA) of Respondent Nos.1 and 2. He states that the sale in
his favour is a valid sale and that mutation No.1542 was duly attested
on 20.12.2006. Respondent Nos.1 and 2 filed a suit for declaration
with permanent injunction against the Appellant stating therein that
they are the owners in possession of the suit property and that they
never sold the suit property to the Appellant. The suit was dismissed
by the Civil Judge, Murree vide judgment and decree dated 31.03.2010
which was upheld in appeal by the Additional District Judge,
Rawalpindi, Camp at Murree vide judgment dated 05.10.2013.

Respondent Nos.1 and 2 then filed a civil revision before the High

RISES EONS OND SLU KKRIRIRUDOOR OI OCRNEARO ALOU. OS NUON SEUNG WAN ALS Uc WANN USAT LVN SEARWN GA PNM UN CEASL AN ITOM ENOL STAG a0 Vi Oe 2 ANY

CA.408/2022. = Qed

Court which set aside both judgments and decrees of the lower fora
and decreed their suit vide the impugned judgment.

3. Learned counsel for the Appellant submits that the sale
in favour of the Appellant is not disputed as he purchased the property
from Respondent No.3 who admittedly held GPA dated 24.11.2006 on
behalf of Respondent Nos.1 and 2 to sell their property. Therefore, a
valid sale was made in his favour and there was no basis to decree the
suit of Respondent Nos.1 and 2. The counsel emphasized on the point
that the Appellant dealt with the GPA of Respondent Nos.1 and 2 and
that neither GPA nor the sale in his favour is disputed. Hence, the suit
of Respondent Nos.1 and 2 could not have been decreed and any relief
Respondent Nos.1 and 2 seek is against Respondent No.3.

4. On the other hand, counsel for Respondent Nos.1 and 2
submits that the stated Respondents filed a declaratory suit as they
were owners in possession of the suit property and being illiterate
| housewives were unable to manage matters relating to the suit
property, hence, they executed a GPA on 24.11.2006 in favour of
Respondent No.3 who was their nephew and lived in the same village
and said that he will take care of the property matters for them. He
further submits that in fact Respondent Nos.1 and 2 executed two
agreements dated 24.11.2006 and 09.01.2007 for the sale of the suit
property; they separately executed two more agreements both dated
22.03.2007 in favour of Respondent No.3, which provide that the sale
consideration to be paid to Respondent Nos.1 and 2 is Rs.1,600,000/-
and acknowledge payment of earnest money of Rs.100,000/-.

Although Respondent Nos.1 and 2 executed the GPA in favour of

Respondent No.3 to finalize the sale but they discovered that the
Appellant collusively bought the suit property and had it mutated in
his favour on 20.12.2006. Their entire case is that they trusted
Respondent No.3 based on their relation with them and that they had
no knowledge of the sale in favour of the Appellant nor did they give
their consent to the same and that with collusion between the
Appellant and Respondent No.3, the suit property was fraudulently
transferred in favour of the Appellant.

5. We have examined the record and heard the learned

counsel at length. The basic contention of the Appellant is that he
purchased the property from Respondent No.3 on the basis of an
admitted GPA executed by Respondent Nos.1 and 2. The GPA gives

Respondent No.3 the power to manage the affairs of the suit property

CA.408/2022. ae

and also to alienate the same and Respondent Nos.1 and 2 do not
dispute this fact. What is in dispute is the sale in favour of the
Appellant. Respondent Nos.1 and 2 entered into an agreement to sell
the suit property with Respondent No.3 in which the sale
consideration is fixed at Rs.1,600,000/-. As per the plaint, Respondent
No.3 betrayed Respondent Nos.1 and 2 by violating the terms and
conditions of the agreement to sell and so caused financial loss to
them. The Appellant in his written statement denied the claim of
Respondent Nos.1 and 2 on the ground that the suit property was sold
to him by Respondent No.3 as the GPA and that the sale is a valid
sale. However, notably there are no details of the sale in his favour
through Respondent No.3 nor did Respondent No.3 appear in the
proceedings.

6. The trial court framed several issues, however, the
relevant issue is Issue No.1 whether defendant No.1 alienated suit land
in favour of defendant No.2 in violation of agreements allegedly
executed between the parties? OPP. For our purposes, the significant
part of this issue is whether Respondent No.3 alienated the suit
property in favour of the Appellant. The Appellant appeared as DW-1
and admitted that Respondent Nos.1 and 2 are illiterate housewives
and reside in the same vicinity. He also admitted that Respondent
No.3 was a property agent and that he had purchased other properties
from him in the past. The Appellant did not produce any evidence of
the sale in his favour as there are no witnesses to the sale or payment
of the sale consideration nor does the revenue record detail the sale
and payment of sale consideration in the presence of the revenue
officer. Furthermore, the Appellant relies on mutation No.1542
(Ex.D.1) being a copy of the Register Dakhal Kharaj Mahaal to show
that the suit property was sold to him by Respondent No.3. Ex.D.1
provides that there was an oral sale through the GPA but gives no
details of the oral sale and simply mentions the sale consideration of
Rs.148,000/-. The Register Dakhal Kharaj Mahaal (Ex.D.1) is an
incomplete document as the report mentioned in Column No.14 was
not relied upon by the Appellant to establish the oral sale in his
favour. There is also no report by the revenue officer to verify the oral
sale in favour of the Appellant. The Appellant relies simply on the fact
that Respondent Nos.1 and 2 are not denying the sale in his favour,
however, this is not borne out from the record. Respondent Nos.1 and

2 deny the sale, as being a fraudulent sale without their knowledge

SSSSSBS SECC ANSARI RS MSMR MTNA I

CA.408/2022. -44

and consent. They categorically state in the plaint that the suit
property was sold to the Appellant fraudulently without their
knowledge and consent. Respondent No.2 while appearing as PW-1
admits that Respondent No.3 offered Respondent Nos.1 and 2 that he
could deal with the suit property for them and sell it at a good price.
This becomes relevant as they are illiterate housewives who trusted
Respondent No.3 to deal with their property and yet he betrayed them.
So Respondent Nos.1 and 2 do not accept the sale, because that is
what they have challenged in the suit. They have merely narrated their
story in which they have explained the betrayal and fraud. This cannot
be seen as accepting the sale in favour of the Appellant. In the
circumstances, the statement of the Appellant that the sale in his
favour stands admitted is against the record and misleading.
Furthermore, the mere fact that the GPA was executed does not
establish the sale in favour of the Appellant. He was required to
provide independent evidence of the oral sale in his favour. Important
to note is that the GPA does not appear in Court, nor any witness to
establish the oral sale. Given that the revenue record clearly mentions
that the mutation is on the basis of an oral sale, the Appellant was
required to prove the oral sale in his favour.

7. Establishing the sale is relevant to the dispute because in
this case the suit property belongs to illiterate women (Pardanashin
women) who trusted Respondent No.3 with the suit property and
entered into an agreement to sell with Respondent No.3 regarding the
sale of the suit property for a sale consideration of Rs.1,600,000/-.
Although, Respondent No.3 and the Appellant are not related,
nonetheless, as per the Appellant’s own contention he has been doing
business with Respondent No.3 in the past with reference to the
buying and selling of real estate. Hence, they have been doing
business together and are known to each other. Therefore, the element
of the fraud cannot be ruled out because both parties are from the
same area as Respondent Nos.1 & 2 and Respondent No.3 being their
relative obtained a GPA in his favour by deceit only to sell the suit
property to the Appellant. In this series of transactions, the main issue
before the Court is the manner in which the property of Respondent
Nos.1 and 2 was dealt with by Respondent No.3 and the Appellant.

8. In the case of a transaction with Pardanashin woman, a
principle of caution is attached to the transaction to protect her rights.

It is necessary that a Pardanashin woman is fully cognizant and aware

CA.408/2022. =

of the transaction and that she has independent advice from a reliable
source to understand the nature of the transaction; there must be.
witnesses to the transaction and to the fact that a Pardanashin woman
has received the sale consideration. Most importantly, a Pardanashin
woman must know to whom she is selling her property and the
transaction must be explained to her in the language she fully
understands as is held in the cases reported as Ghulam Farid and
another v. Sher Rehman through LRs (2016 SCMR 862) and Ghulam
Muhammad v. Zohran Bibi and others (2021 SCMR 19). In a case
where a Pardanashin woman has trusted a relative and executed a
general power of attorney for her to sell the property, it is still
incumbent upon the power of attorney holder to fulfil the
aforementioned conditions of making the Pardanashin woman aware of
the sale that is about to be executed under the power of attorney. This
is because the underlying principle here is to ensure that at all times
where a woman executes a transaction with reference to her property,
it is done freely and deliberately. The mere fact that a power of
attorney has been executed by a Pardanashin woman does not absolve
the attorney holder from ensuring that he has informed the
Pardanashin woman of the sale he is to execute under that attorney
and to obtain her consent in this regard. This is necessary to establish
the fairness and knowledge of the transaction for the benefit of a
Pardanashin woman. We have also held in the case reported as
Muhammad Naeem Khan and another Mugadas Khan (deceased)
through L.Rs. and another (PLD 2022 SC 99) that the objective of this
Court has been to protect Pardanashin women from the risk of an
unfair deal and to ensure that any transaction related to the sale of
their property is effected by free will and with consent. We have also
held that wherever there is a transaction with Pardanashin women, it
must be established that they were given independent, impartial and
objective advice understanding all implications and ramifications of
the transaction to ensure that they give their consent to the
transaction, because valuable rights are involved and the Pardanashin
women should be able to make an informed decision with reference to
their property with the help of proper advice and consultation. This
Court has also Held in the case reported as Mian Allah Ditta through
L.Rs v. Mst. Sakina Bibi and others (2013 SCMR 868) that the burden
of proof lies on the person exercising the power of attorney to prove

that the transaction was carried out in good faith and with full

SSRN 2 ENCANA DN RS ONS UENO a SNL

CA.408/2022. 26h

knowledge and consent of the grantor. Hence, the mere fact that
Pardanashin women execute a general power of attorney will not
absolve the attorney nor the buyer of the obligation to ensure that the
Pardanashin women have full knowledge of the sale and have given
their consent to the sale. In the case of a Pardanashin woman, even if
a power of attorney is executed, the mere execution of the power of
attorney will not establish the consent and intent of the Pardanashin
woman to effectuate sale in favour of a specific buyer. For the
purposes of disposal of the property of Pardanashin women, their
independent consent and willingness to dispose of their property must
be taken and established notwithstanding the execution of a general
power of attorney.

9. The concept of protecting the rights of Pardanashin
women finds its root in the cultural practice of women staying within
the protection of their home, having limited access to affairs outside
their home. Consequently, such women have limited interaction with
society and do not participate in matters outside their home. This
suggests that their knowledge and information about matters outside
their home is limited and insufficient to take informed decisions.
Accordingly, the courts have protected the rights of such women in
order to protect them from betrayal, exploitation and fraud especially
where valuable property rights are concerned. The concept of an
illiterate woman is similar to that of a Pardanashin woman as both
lack education and basic knowledge of worldly affairs and both
interact essentially at a limited level with society. This limited
participation hampers her ability to take informed decisions. Such
women are perceived as being unskilled, uneducated and incompetent -
so far as the business matters are concerned. They lack experience
and are easily susceptible to deceit even by their relatives. The courts
endeavour to protect Pardanashin or illiterate women due to their
social standing and vulnerability not only from society at large but also
from relatives. Women are often the targets of fraud and deceit when it
comes to property matters, which is why the courts have invoked the
principle of caution in protecting the rights of such women so that
they are not wrongfully deprived of their property. The limitations of
Pardanashin or illiterate women have been duly considered by the
courts against which the courts have held that such women must be

given independent advice from a reliable and trustworthy source so as

to ensure that they fully understand the transaction and the

CA.408/2022. -7-

consequences of that transaction. In Muhammad Naeem Khan’s case
(supra), we have categorically stated that whenever the authenticity or
genuineness of a transaction entered into by a Pardanashin woman is
disputed or claimed to have been secured on the basis of fraud or
misrepresentation, the burden will lie on the beneficiary of that
transaction to prove good faith and more importantly, the Court will
consider whether the transaction was entered into with free will or
under duress. It goes without saying that the effort to protect rights of
Pardanashin and illiterate women is necessary so as to give such
women the ability to make independent decisions with reference to
their property or belongings so as to ensure that they are not deprived
of the ability to take a good decision based on their social standing in
society. This is a step towards ensuring that there is an element of
financial and economical independence given to women, who have
been deprived of education and have limited interaction within the
home and the family. While this may be the customary or traditional
role of women as seen by society in general, the endeavour of the
Court has always been to protect the vulnerability and susceptibility of
women.

10. In this case, there was no independent advice given to
Pardanashin women. Moreover, Respondent No.3 being the GPA holder
did not inform Respondent Nos.1 and 2 of the sale in favour of the
Appellant. Furthermore, even though the Appellant resides in the
same village, he made no effort to ascertain whether Respondent Nos. 1
and 2 intended to sell their property through the GPA to him. This fact
becomes relevant when seen in the context of the evidence with
reference to the sale consideration as Respondent Nos.1 and 2 entered
into an agreement to sell the suit property for Rs.1,600,000/- whereas
the Appellant purchased the property from the GPA for Rs.148,000/-.
Given that Respondent No.3 executed the agreement to sell with
Respondent Nos.1 and 2 and agreed to pay them Rs.1,600,000/- for
the sale of the property, he betrayed their trust, did not complete the
sale as agreed under the agreement to sell and instead sold the suit
property to the Appellant through an oral sale. In this regard, we note
that the absence of Respondent No.3 is critical to the case of the
Appellant because there is no independent evidence by the power of
attorney holder to disclose the intent of Respondent Nos.1 and 2 to sell
the suit property as per their directions and with their consent.

Respondent Nos.1l and 2 alleged fraud and claimed that they have

CA.408/2022. age

been deprived of their lawful rights in the suit property. The Appellant,
being the beneficiary of this transaction was required to prove the oral
sale in his favour and also to prove that the sale through the GPA was
with the consent of the owners of the suit property being Respondent
Nos.1 and 2.

Tae Under the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed with no

order as to costs.

WHR vespert, Sam uncle, "JUDGE

my Aepala nvte.. JUDGE

JUDGE

Announced on 0 . at A’ D

Approved for Reportin
Azmat/*

LAA a ce
7

Jamal Khan Mandokhail, J- I have had the privilege of going through the
judgment authored by Ayesha A. Malik, J. and concurred with by Ijaz ul Ahsan, J.
With great respect, I am unable to agree with the findings given therein and the
conclusion arrived at by my learned colleagues while dismissing the appeal.

Therefore, I have appended my separate note thereto.

Facts

2. Respondent Nos.1 and 2 were the recorded owners of the property described
in the plaint (disputed property), which was sold by them to their nephew,
Mubsrmed Pervaiz son of Muhammad Gulzar, (Respondent No.3) for
consideration in the amount of Rs.1,600,000/- through an agreement to sell dated
23.11.2006. Respondent No.3 made an advance payment of Rs.100,000/- each to
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2, whereas the remainder amount was to be paid to within
the period stipulated in the agreement. On the next day, Respondent Nos. 1 and 2
appointed Respondent No.3 as their attorney through a registered power of attorney
dated 24.11.2006 authorising him with all powers, including alienation of ownership
of their property rights in respect of the disputed property. In compliance of the
agreement, Respondent No.3 delivered a cheque amounting to Rs. 1,102,500/- to
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2, however, on presentation before the bank it could not be

encashed.

3; Respondent No.3 in his capacity as the attorney subsequently sold the
disputed property to the Appellant and transferred it to the latter’s name vide
Mutation No. 1542 dated 29.11.2006 (disputed mutation). Thereafter, Respondent
Nos. 1 and 2 entered into another agreement with Respondent No.3 on 09.01.2007,
pursuant to which the remainder amount of the disputed property was re-scheduled
and was to be paid within a month, but the needful was not done. They entered into
another agreement on 22.03.2007, on the basis whereof, time for payment of the
outstanding amount was further extended. It is important to mention here that
Respondent Nos.1 and 2 were aware of the alienation of the property through the
disputed mutation, which was incorporated in the said agreement. It was emphasized
that in case Respondent No.3 fails to pay the outstanding amount as per the fresh
agreement, Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 shall be entitled to retrieve the disputed

property and withdraw/cancel the power of attorney executed in the former’s favout.
4. Despite commitments made in the abovementioned agreements,
Respondent No.3 once again failed to clear the outstanding amount. Consequently,
Respondent Nos.1 and 2 filed a Suit for.declaration and permanent injunction against
the Appellant and Respondent No.3 and also challenged the disputed mutation on
the grounds of fraud, cheating and collusiveness. The Appellant contested the Suit alleging
therein that he is a bona fide purchaser and is in possession of the disputed property
after payment of the consideration in the amount of Rs.1,600,000/- to the attorney.
It is to be noted that the power of attorney was not challenged at any stage and
remains intact till date. Respondent No.3 did not appear before the Trial Court to
contest the Suit or to rebut the Appellant’s claim, as such, he was proceeded against
ex parte. The Trial Court dismissed the Suit and the Appellate Court affirmed the
judgment and decree. Respondent Nos.1 and 2 filed a Civil Revision before the
Lahore High Court, Rawalpindi Bench, Rawalpindi which was allowed mde the
impugned judgment and decree dated 31.01.2022, whereby the concurrent findings
of the Courts below were set aside and the Suit was decreed in favour of Respondent

Nos. 1 and 2, hence, this Appeal.

5 Arguments heard and perused the record.
Reasons
6. The Suit of Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 is based upon the non-performance of

the agreements on part of Respondent No.3. At the same time they had challenged
the mutation on the ground of fraud, cheating and collusiveness. The agreement dated
23.11.2006, described in the plaint and relied upon by Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 is
evidence of the fact that they sold the disputed property to Respondent No.3,
followed by which a registered power of attorney was executed in his favour.
Respondent No.3 exercised his authority by alienating the disputed property in the
name of the Appellant through the disputed mutation on 29.11.2006. The factum of
this sale and the number of the disputed mutation was already in the knowledge of
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2, who subsequently incorporated the same into the
agreement dated 22.03.2007, with their free will and consent. Admittedly,
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 despite having such knowledge, did not raise any objection
nor did they challenge it. Instead, they chose to extend the time for the outstanding
payment and to receive the same from Respondent No.3. It reflects from the facts
and circumstances of the case that Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 had a grievance against
Respondent No.3 only as fat as the outstanding amount was concerned. Essentially,
the payment was to Be made by Respondent No.3 as per the fresh schedule described

in the agreements. It is for this reason that Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 did not make
the Appellant party to the agreement. This point finds strength from the fact that the
Appellant in his written statement and in his statement recorded before the Trial
Court contended that he had paid an amount of Rs.1,600,000/- as consideration for
the disputed property to Respondent No.3, whereafter the property was transferred
to him through the disputed mutation. The consideration amount mentioned in the
agreements is the same as alleged by the Appellant in his written statement and in his
statement recorded before the Court. It is the case of Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 that
Respondent No.3 paid them an amount of Rs.100,000/- each and delivered the
cheque for the remainder amount which was subsequently dishonoured. This fact
further supports the contention of the Appellant that he had already paid the entirety
of the consideration amount to Respondent No.3. Besides, ‘the stance of the
Appellant was neither challenged by Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 nor was it contested
by Respondent No.3. Moreover, the Appellant was not party to the agreements, as
such, is not bound by their terms and conditions. In such circumstances, the present
Suit based on the agreements is not maintainable against the Appellant. In the cases
of Muhammad Naeem Khan' and, Mian Allah Dittd relied upon by my learned colleague,
it was held that where valuable rights of a Pardanashin lady were concerned, such
person must have had the knowledge and free consent in relation to the transaction.
The present case is distinguishable as Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 did not plead their
unawareness about the transaction effected between Respondent No.3 and the
Appellant, nor denied their consent regarding the said transaction. Rather,
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in paragraph No. 4 of their plaint have pleaded that
Respondent No.3 has alienated the property side the disputed mutation in favour of
the Appellant by violating the terms and conditions set forth in the said agreements.
Perusal of the agreements would further reveal that no condition was attached to the
transaction effected between Respondent No.3 and the Appellant. As has been
discussed herein, that Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 not only had the knowledge
regarding alienation of the disputed property by Respondent No.3 on their behalf
but affirmed it as well and have made the disputed mutation the subject matter of
the agreement without any objection. Therefore, the facts and circumstances of the
cases relied upon by my learned colleague are different from the facts and

circumstances of the case in hand.
Le It is also important to mention here that Respondent No.3 was proceeded

against ex parte by the Trial Court and also did not appear before the High Court as

well as this Court. Such non-appearance on behalf of Respondent No.3 suggests ala

‘PLD 2022 SC 99
? 2013 SCMR 868

fide on his part and his collusion with Respondent Nos. 1 and 2, as he was not only
their authorised attorney, but also their nephew. It a settled principle of law that an
allegation of fraud, cheating and collusiveness raised by a person is required to be proved
by him. Since Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have raised such plea in relation to the
disputed mutation, therefore, they were required to produce evidence in order to
prove their allegations, but the record is indicative of the fact that they have failed to
do the needful. Even otherwise, the mentioning of the number of the disputed
mutation in the agreement dated 22.03.2007, without placing any objection, not only
proves their knowledge, free will, and consent with regard to the transaction effected
between the Appellant and Respondent No.3 in his capacity as an attorney, it negates
their allegations as well. Since their Suit is based on the agreements in which the
Appellant was not a party, at best, their claim could only have been to the extent of
recovery of the outstanding amount from Respondent No.3. The contents of the
plaint do not disclose any cause of action against the Appellant. Regardless of such
fact, they have even failed to make out a case against the Appellant who is the bona
Jide purchaser. From the facts and circumstances of the case, it appears that the Suit
has been filed by Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in connivance with Respondent No.3 in
a colourful manner to undo the lawful transaction and the subsequent mutation. The
Trial Court as well as the Appellate Court have concurrently arrived at a correct
conclusion by dismissing their Suit. The reasoning given by the learned Judge of the
High Court is contrary to the record, therefore, the concurrent findings of fact of
the Courts below have been wrongly reversed, hence, the impugned judgment and

decree are not sustainable.

Conclusion

Thus, in view of above, the appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment and
decree of the High Court are set aside. The judgments and decrees of the Trial Court
and the Appellate Court are upheld.

(Jamal Khan Mandokhail)
Judge

Islamabad
K.Anees/A. Cheema, LC

CA.408/2022.

ORDER OF THE BENCH

By majority of two to one (Jamal Khan Mandokhail, J.
dissenting), this Civil Appeal is dismissed.

JUPGE
JUDGE

JUDGE

Announced on 08.08.2023 at Islamabad.
‘Approved for Reporting’
