IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
(Appellate Jurisdiction)

Present:

Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa

Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi

Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar

(AER) ial
Civil Appeals No. 2016 and 2017 of 2022
(Against the judgment dated 10.05.2022 passed by

the High Court of Sindh, Karachi in C.P. No. D-1390 of
2020 and SCRA No. 303 of 2020)

M/s Middle East Construction Company, Karachi. set Appellant

(in both cases)
Versus

The Collector of Customs, Karachi. gas Respondents
(in both cases)

For the Appellant: Mr. Shahzada Mazhar, ASC.

(In both cases) (Through video-link, Lahore)

For the Respondent: Mr. M. Nadeem Qureshi, ASC.

(In CA, 2016/22) Ms. Sania Rasool Bhutto, Asst. Collector
! (Though video-link, Karachi)

Date. of Hearing: 16.02.2023

ORDER y

Qazi Faez Isa, J. The learned counsel for the appellant states that both
these appeals pertain to the import of four prime movers which were
imported through two Goods Declarations wherein the appellant described
the imported goods, as per Pakistan Customs Tariff Code 8701.2040, that
is, ‘Road tractors for semi-trailers (prime movers) of 280 HP and above’. The

Customs authorities did not clear the goods alleging that they were trucks

"and also older than five years and as such could not be imported under the

Import Policy Order, 2016. The orders of the adjudicating officer were
assailed before the Customs Appellate Tribunal, Karachi (‘the Tribunal’)
and the Tribunal set-aside the same vide judgments dated 17 January
2020. yi

2: The respondent assailed the judgments of the Tribunal in Special
“Custom Reference Applications No. 303 and 304 of 2020 and the appellant

t
te

i

14

i
i
|
|
|
|

Civil Appeals No. 2016 and 2017 of 2022 2

filed: Constitution Petition No. D-1390 of 2020, since the Customs

department was not complying with the judgments of the Tribunal.

3. The learned Mr. Shahzada Mazhar submits that the learned Judges of
the High Court proceeded to determine facts, which in the last resort the Tribunal
could only do, and did so by directly accessing what is stated to be the website of
the manufacturer of the imported vehticles (Hino, Japan), and set-aside the well
reasoned judgments of the Tribunal. He submits that the references filed by
the respondent, Collector of Customs, did not call upon the High Court to
undertake the exercise of logging on to any website, which, in any event,

the High Court could not do, nor could it take it upon itself to do so. The

. learned counsel ‘has also pointed to the photographs of the vehicles

reproduced i in the impugned judgments which he says are not in respect of

the same vehicles as those imported by the appellant. The learned Mr.

Shahzada Mazhar submits that the jurisdiction of the High Court is
invoked under section 196 of the Customs Act, 1969 (‘the Act’) which
permits only ‘a question of law arising out of [the Tribunal’s] such order’ as
per ‘sub-section (1) of section 196 of the Act, which is reiterated in sub-
section (5) of section 196 of the Act whereby the jurisdiction of the High

Court is limited to question of law.

4. On the other hand the learned Mr. Nadeem Qureshi, representing the
respondent, has referred to the examination report and to the re-
examination report, which was ordered to be conducted by the adjudicating
officer, and states that these reports clearly state that the vehicles could
not be imported under the Import’Policy Order, 2016 and that the imported
vehicles were not prime movers, as stated, but were trucks. Concluding his
submissions, he states that the judgments of the learned Judges of the
High Court were well reasoned and do not call for interference by this

Court.

5. We enquired from the learned counsel for the respondent whether the
digital pictures taken at the time of inspection (at page 66 of CPLA No.
2057/2022) correctly depicted the vehicles under consideration and he
stated that they did. However, these are different from the photographs

inserted in the impugned judgments.

6. . We have heard the learned ‘counsel for the parties and examined the

photographs and documents on record. The orders-in-original of the

_/ Civil ‘Appeédte N 0.2016 and 2017 of 2022 3

adjudicating officer referred to different reports but he did not himself opine
on the nature of imported vehicles. The re-examination report is reproduced
in the orders-in-original (at pages 60-61 of CPLA No. 2057/2022) which
commence by stating that the vehicles were ‘prime mover trucks six
wheelers’ but then goes on to state that the same were ‘trucks instead of
prime movers’, and as such there is an apparent contradiction therein. Be
that as it may, an examination or re-examination report should give
reasons in disagreeing with the inspection report issued by the pre-
inspection company, Bureau Veritas, which had categorised the vehicles as
prime movers. The Tribunal on its part stated that the ground with regard
to non-importability of the vehicles, as subsequently alleged, was not

specifically stipulated in the show cause notices.

Us The importer has to disclose the nature of the imported goods, and if
he produces a pre-shipment inspection certificate of an approved pre-
shipment inspection company the importer discharges the initial burden of
proof. The certification by Bureau Veritas confirms the categorization of the
vehicles in the Goods Declarations as prime movers. If the Customs

department did not accept such certification it was required to produce

evidence in rebuttal. In the instant case the examination report and the re- -

examination report do not state why the inspection report of the pre-
shipment inspection company (Bureau Veritas) was-not correct nor do the
examination and re-examination reports contain reasons for the

determination that the vehicles were in fact trucks.

8. * It is also well settled that” the Tribunal is the last forum for the
determination of facts. In these cases the Tribunal had concluded that the
imported vehicles were prime movers. The learned Judges of the High Court
undoubtedly realized the shortcomings in the respondent’s references,
therefore, they took it upon themselves to ascertain the nature. of. the

vehicles. The High Court’s jurisdiction under section 196 of. the Act is

limited to a question of law. It did not lay within the jurisdictional domain ©

of the High Court to itself determine the nature of the imported vehicles. If
the learned Judges of the High Court preferred any particular reports which

were before them, and if they were setting aside the judgments of the

‘Tribunal then they should have given valid reasons for their preference.

However, the High Court should not have embarked upon determining the

nature of the vehicles itself, and to do so by relying upon material which

CAr em Af eeas

—~S. ) Civil Appeals No, 2016 and 2017 of 2022 4

[ a had not been produced either before the adjudicating officer or the
4 Tribunal. We cannot endorse the manner in which the learned Judges of

TA the High Court took it upon themselves to ascertain the nature of the
/ imported vehicles.

the aforesaid reasons. Therefore, these appeals are allowed by setting aside
the impugned judgments of the High Court and by restoring the judgments
dated 17 January 2020 of the Tribunal. Resultantly, the subject vehicles be
released immediately on payment of the applicable duties and taxes, if the

| 9, The impugned judgments of the High Court are not sustainable for
}
i}

same have not already been paid.

Islamabad
16.02.2023

Approved for Reporting
Arif ‘

|
|
i

t

Ont Anmiecia Ma, ONT and GCI TF of BEES

