IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
                (Appellate Jurisdiction) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Justice Amin-ud-Din Khan 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Justice Athar Minallah 
 
 
CIVIL PETITION NO.3801 OF 2022 
(Against the order dated 21.09.2022 of the 
Lahore High Court, Rawalpindi Bench passed 
in Writ Petition No.2582 of 2022) 
 
Shaista Habib 
 
 
 
 
 
… Petitioner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Versus 
 
Muhammad Arif Habib and others 
 
 
…Respondent(s) 
 
Petitioner:  
 
In person a/w Ibrahim (minor) 
 
 
 
 
 
For respondent No.1: 
Raja Muhammad Sattar, ASC 
a/w respondent No.1 
 
Date of hearing: 
 
06.03.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGMENT  
 
Athar Minallah, J.- The High Court has dismissed the petition of 
Shaista Habib (“petitioner”), who had invoked the jurisdiction vested 
under Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 (“Constitution”). She had challenged the orders of two 
competent courts, whereby the question of custody of a child, 
Mohammad Ibrahim, was decided against her. Through this petition 
she has sought leave against the judgment, dated 21.09.2022, of the 
High Court. 
  
2. 
Muhammad Arif Habib (“respondent”) and the petitioner had tied 
the knot on 21.6.2012. They were blessed with a son, Muhammad 
Ibrahim (“minor”) on 17.4.2013. The matrimonial differences which 
developed between the spouses had initially led to their separation but, 
subsequently, the marriage ended in a divorce on 22.11.2016. The 
petitioner and the minor moved to the house of the former's mother 
after separation. The relationship between the parties became 
unpleasant to such an extent that, on acceptance of the respondent’s 
CP-3801 of 2022 
2
petition, the Justice of the Peace, vide order dated 02-01-2017, ordered 
registration of a criminal case against the petitioner. The respondent 
filed an application on 28-01-2017 under section 25 of the Guardian 
and Wards Act, 1890 (“the Act of 1890”) seeking the custody of the 
minor. The Guardian Judge/Judge Family Court, Kahuta, allowed the 
application on 30.06.2021 while the appeal preferred by the petitioner 
was dismissed by the Additional District Judge on 20.06.2022. The 
constitutional petition filed by the petitioner did not succeed and it was 
dismissed by the High Court vide the impugned judgment dated 
21.09.2022. 
  
3. 
The petitioner appeared in person along with the minor, 
Mohammad Ibrahim. The latter was smartly dressed and we found him 
to be visibly confident and mature for his age. He responded to our 
queries intelligently and his self assured demeanor was noticeable, 
despite having been exposed to the vicissitudes of separation followed 
by the divorce of his parents. He has unequivocally stated that although 
he acknowledged the respondent to be his father but he was a stranger 
to him, since they had hardly met after leaving his house. He, therefore, 
unequivocally expressed his reluctance to be separated from his mother 
i.e the petitioner so as to live with his father. It was obvious that the 
respondent and the minor did not have a relationship or a bond in order 
to justify uprooting the latter from the custody of his mother. The 
learned counsel for the respondent was also heard. 
 
4. 
The petitioner and the respondent are litigating over the custody 
of the minor since 2017. The marriage had ended in a divorce in 2016 
and the respondent had filed an application before the family court in 
2017 for obtaining the custody of the minor. The minor was an infant 
when he had left the house of the respondent and since then he has 
lived with the petitioner. The record shows that the respondent had not 
CP-3801 of 2022 
3
made a serious and meaningful effort to enable him to spend time with 
the minor, either through intervention of the court or otherwise. 
Admittedly, the petitioner has contracted another marriage after her 
divorce and the second husband has children from his first wife. It 
appears from the reasoning recorded in the judgments rendered by the 
Guardian Judge/Judge Family Court as well as the appellate court that 
the petitioner’s second marriage and the age of the minor were the two 
factors that had prevailed for granting custody of the minor to the 
respondent. The variables in the context of assessing the welfare of the 
minor were not taken into consideration. The evidence produced by the 
parties appears to have been found sufficient to decide the custody 
dispute. The evidence relied upon by both the courts was not in the 
context of those factors which should have been considered in order to 
assess the welfare of the minor. The courts also did not seek 
professional assistance in order to assess the crucial factor of the 
welfare of the minor, nor such a professional service or facility appears 
to have been accessible to the courts. The minor was at the centre stage 
of the custody battle between feuding parents and the assessment of his 
interests and welfare was most crucial. This was definitely an 
overarching principle which ought to have been considered while 
deciding the custody dispute. The rights of the parents were subservient 
to the welfare of the minor and thus it was the duty of the courts to 
assess and determine a course that would have served the best interest 
of the minor. Any decision regarding the custody of a child without 
assessment and determination of the latter's welfare and best interests 
by taking into consideration the relevant factors and variables cannot 
be sustainable, nor can the exercise of discretion be lawful. The welfare 
of a minor and the latter's best interest is the foundational principle for 
deciding custody disputes. In order to appreciate the significance of the 
CP-3801 of 2022 
4
principle governing custody disputes it would be beneficial to highlight 
the settled law which ought to guide a court.  
 
5. 
It is settled law that the father is the natural guardian while the 
mother is entitled to the custody (hizanat) of a male child till the age of 
seven years while in case of a female till she attains puberty. This right 
continues notwithstanding a divorce or separation. As a natural 
guardian it is the obligation of the father to maintain the child even if 
the custody is with the mother. The inability of the mother to financially 
support the child is not a determinate ground to deprive her from 
custody because in such an eventuality the father's obligation regarding 
maintenance is not extinguished. The rule that the father is a natural 
guardian and, therefore, entitled to the custody of the child nor that the 
mother loses the right of hizanat after the minor has attained the 
prescribed age or puberty, as the case may be, is not absolute, rather 
subject to exceptions.1 The decision regarding custody of a child is 
governed on the fundamental principle, the paramount and overarching 
consideration is the welfare of the child i.e to ascertain the course 
which is in the latter's best interest. The crucial criterion is, therefore, 
the best interest and welfare of a child while determining the question 
of custody. The rights or aspirations of the parents or some other 
person are subservient to this principle and each case of custody must 
be decided on the basis of ascertaining a course which is in the 'best 
interest of the child'. The factors or variables that may be taken into 
consideration while determining the question of custody of a child are 
not exhaustive but they would depend on the facts and circumstances 
of each case. The guiding principle is to ensure that the determination 
                                                
1 Malik Khizar Hayat Khan Tiwana and another v. Mst. Zainab Begum and others (PLD 1967 
Supreme Court 402),  
Mst. Rubia Jilani v. Zahoor Akhtar Raja and others (1999 SCMR 1834) 
Mst. Zahida Kiani and another v. Capt. (Rtd.) Shahid Ali Khan (1993 SCMR 2303) 
Mst. Nighat Firdous v. Khadim Hussain (1998 SCMR 1593) 
Mst. Feroze Begum v. Lt.Col. Muhammad Hussain (1983 SCMR 606) 
CP-3801 of 2022 
5
of custody promotes the rights of the child as well as the latter's 
wellbeing. The overriding consideration must be to protect the child 
from any physical, mental or emotional injury, neglect or negligent 
treatment. The mother’s disability, illiteracy or financial status are not 
the sole determinant factors.2 The second marriage contracted by the 
mother also cannot become a stand-alone reason to disqualify her from 
obtaining the custody of the child.3 The question of custody involves 
taking into consideration the factors which are relevant to the 
upbringing, nursing and fostering of the child. It essentially extends to 
the emotional, personal and physical wellbeing of a child. The sole 
object is to ensure that the overall growth and development of the child 
is guaranteed. The process adopted in order to determine the best 
interest has been described by the House of Lords4 “ ....... connotes a 
process, whereby all the relevant facts, relationship, claims and wishes 
of parents, risks, choices and other circumstances are taken into 
account and weighed, the course to follow will be that which is best in 
the interest of the child.”  
 
7. 
The overarching principle in cases involving the question of 
custody and visitation rights of the parents is, therefore, determination 
of the welfare of the child, i.e. to ascertain a course that would serve the 
best interest of the child. Sections 17 and 25 of the Act of 1890 set out 
the broad guidelines which are to be taken into consideration while 
deciding custody disputes. It is the duty of the court to form an opinion 
and adopt a course on the basis of the paramount principle of the 
welfare of the child. Section 17 explicitly provides that a court shall be 
guided by what appears in the circumstances to secure the welfare of 
the minor, consistent with the law to which the minor is subject. Sub-
                                                
2 Mst. Beena v. Raja Muhammad and others (PLD 2020 Supreme Court 508) 
Bashir Ahmed v. Incharge (Female) Darulaman, Mianwali and others (2011 SCMR 1329) 
3 Raja Muhammad Owais v. Mst. Nazia Jabeen and others (2022 SCMR 2123) 
4 J. v. C. 1970 (H.L.(E.) 668 
CP-3801 of 2022 
6
section (3) provides that if the minor is old enough to form an intelligent 
preference then the court may consider that preference. As already 
noted above, while determining the welfare of the child in the context of 
custody disputes the court may grant the custody to a person other 
than the parents e.g the grandparents or aunt, if doing so would 
promote the welfare and best interest of the child.5. As a general rule 
the guardian and family court is the final arbiter for determining the 
question of custody, except when it has made a determination in an 
arbitrary, capricious or fanciful manner i.e when the fundamental 
principle of welfare of the child has not been considered or determined 
in the light of the variables which are relevant in the given 
circumstances.6 If the court has ignored the welfare of the child and the 
latter's best interest or has given preference to some other ground then 
the decision would not be sustainable. The court, in its endeavor to 
assess and determine the welfare of a child, is not bound to follow rigid 
formalities, strict adherence to procedure or rules or technicalities if 
doing so may hamper the determination or undermine the fundamental 
criterion of the best interest of the child.7 In a nutshell, the overarching 
and fundamental principle that must prevail and guide a court in 
determining custody disputes is the welfare of a child. The court has to 
adopt a course that would be in the best interest of the child because 
his/her welfare must always be the paramount consideration.                           
 
8. 
In the case before us, the minor was confident, intelligent and 
mature enough to form his own preferences. He had unambiguously 
stated before us that his father was no more than a stranger because he 
had not had the opportunity to spend time with him. He had also stated 
that he was not familiar with the other members of his father's family 
                                                
5 Raja Muhammad Owais v. Mst. Nazia Jabeen (2022 SCMR 2123), Zahoor Ahmad v. Mst. 
Rukhsana Kausar and others (2000 SCMR 707) and Mst. Razia Rehman v. Station 
House Officer (PLD 2006 SC 533) 
6 Mirjam Aberras Lehdeaho v. SHO Police Statoin Chung and others (2018 SCMR 427). 
7 Mst. Rania Jilani v. Zahoor Akhtar Raja and others (1999 SCMR 1834) 
CP-3801 of 2022 
7
and thus for him they too were strangers. He visibly appeared to be 
happy and comfortable with his mother and his relationship with his 
step father also seemed to be pleasant. It is obvious from the record 
that the respondent, despite being his father, had not made a serious 
and meaningful effort to assert his visitation rights. The minor was 
definitely not prepared nor willing to live with his father at this stage. 
He unambiguously stated that he preferred to remain in the custody of 
his mother with whom he had lived since his birth. The crucial factor of 
the welfare of the minor and his best interest was not taken into 
consideration by the courts. In such an eventuality the minor would 
have been compelled, without his consent, to abruptly shift to a new 
abode where all the inhabitants would have been strangers to him. It 
would have definitely exposed him to unimaginable mental and 
emotional trauma. It could have resulted in irreversible lifelong 
psychological scars. It is obvious from the record that neither the family 
court nor the appellate court had taken appropriate steps to assess the 
welfare of the minor and, instead, the question of custody was decided 
on the basis of other factors. The factors taken into consideration could 
not override the criterion of adopting the course which would have been 
in the best interest of the child. The courts had erred in failing to 
inquire into or assess the emotional and psychological impact on the 
minor in case of an abrupt displacement from the custody of his mother 
with whom he had lived since his birth. There is nothing on record to 
even remotely show that the courts had undertaken an effective exercise 
to assess and determine the welfare of the minor and, thereafter, adopt 
a course that would have been in his best interest. The courts appear to 
have treated the delicate and sensitive dispute relating to child custody 
as if it was an ordinary civil matter. The judges who had dealt with the 
case may not have been professionally trained in order to enable them 
to identify the relevant variables and to assess and determine the 
CP-3801 of 2022 
8
question of custody of the child on the basis of the foundational 
principle of welfare of the child and then adopt a course that would 
have been in the latter's best interest. The relevant factors such as the 
parenting capacity, relationship of the child with each parent, the 
mental health of both the parents as well as the minor, the latter's 
emotional and mental needs and such other relevant factors in the 
context of determining the welfare of the child were not taken into 
consideration let alone assessment and determination of a course that 
would have been in the best interest of the child. The order regarding 
giving custody of the minor to the respondent in the circumstances 
could not have served his best interests. The psychological and 
emotional impact on the minor would have breached the foundational 
principle of his welfare and of adopting a course in his best interest. The 
impugned judgments are, therefore, not sustainable because the 
paramount fundamental criterion, the welfare of the minor, was not 
even considered, let alone its assessment and determination.  
 
10. 
For the above reasons, we convert this petition into an appeal and 
the same is allowed. The impugned judgments/orders are hereby set-
aside. Consequently, the custody of the minor shall be retained by the 
petitioner. We expect that as reasonable and responsible parents the 
respondent and the petitioner will amicably settle the custody dispute 
having regard to the best interest and welfare of the minor. We also 
expect that a visitation schedule will also be settled by them in such 
manner which will not breach the principle of the welfare of the minor. 
In case they fail to agree upon a schedule then the respondent shall be 
at liberty to approach a competent court to assert his visitation rights. 
In the meanwhile, the schedule, if any, settled by a competent court 
shall continue to be observed until it has been modified and varied.  
 
CP-3801 of 2022 
9
11. 
We cannot turn a blind eye to the apparent failure of the State to 
fulfill its constitutional obligations in the context of safeguarding the 
rights of the children embroiled in litigation between the parents 
regarding their custody. The children are vulnerable and traumatic 
experiences early in life can leave lifelong scars which may profoundly 
affect the quality of their lives. The exposure of a child to the 
environment generally prevalent in the ordinary courts could profoundly 
affect their impressionable minds. Moreover, insensitivity or lack of 
special expertise on part of the presiding judges while dealing with 
matters relating to litigation involving the rights of children can gravely 
affect their rights and thus impact their lives adversely. The litigation 
involving the rights of children, such as custody disputes, requires 
special expertise, training and professional aptitude on part of the 
presiding judges. The environment of a court dealing with the rights of 
the children must also cater to their emotional and psychological needs. 
The courts must also be adequately equipped and enabled to 
professionally assess and determine the welfare of a child in each case. 
The courts must have access to professional consultation and advice of 
qualified experts such as psychologists. The parents and the courts 
must also have access to child welfare and social assistance services to 
protect and fulfill the rights of each child. Article 35 of the Constitution 
has explicitly made it an obligation of the State to protect the marriage, 
the family, and the mother and the child. The State has been defined in 
Article 7. It is a constitutional duty under Article 29(3) of the President 
or the Governor of the Province, as the case may be, to cause to be 
prepared and laid before the respective legislatures a report in respect 
of each year, inter alia, regarding observance and implementation of the 
obligation relating to children under Article 37 of the Constitution. 
Likewise, it is an obligation of the State to ensure that the fundamental 
rights enshrined in the Constitution are protected and fulfilled in the 
CP-3801 of 2022 
10
case of children. It is, therefore, implicit in the obligation of the State 
towards protecting the rights of the children to provide child friendly 
courts presided by specially trained professional judges. It is also the 
duty of the State to enable the child friendly courts to assess the welfare 
of the child in family matters, such as custody disputes, by providing 
access to professional consultation and opinions of experts e.g. 
psychologists etc. It is the State's responsibility to provide affective child 
care and social services to protect and facilitate fulfilling the rights of 
those children who get entangled in custody disputes between feuding 
parents. It is an obligation of the State of Pakistan under the United 
Nation Convention of Rights of the Child to ensure the protection and to 
take all necessary steps for child welfare. We direct the Registrar of this 
Court to send copies of this order to the President and the Governors of 
the Provinces to ensure compliance with their respective obligations 
under Article 29(3) of the Constitution in the context of Article 35 ibid. 
The Registrar is further directed to send copies of this order to the Chief 
Secretaries of the Provinces and the Chief Commissioner of Islamabad 
Capital Territory for fulfilling the obligations of the State in relation to 
the rights of the children as highlighted herein above. In addition, 
copies of the order is directed to be sent to the Director Generals of the 
Federal and Provincial Judicial Academies for their consideration to 
include special training courses for judges and staff of family courts, 
relating to dealing with child custody cases and to develop their 
capacity to assess and determine the criterion of welfare of the child.                     
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad the 
6th March 2023 
‘APPROVED FOR REPORTING’ 
(Aamir Sh./Momal Malik, LC)      
