SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
(Appellate Jurisdiction) 
 
 
PRESENT: 
 
 
 
Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ 
 
 
 
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah 
 
 
 
Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik 
 
 
 
CIVIL PETITIONS NO.943 TO 954-K OF 2022 
 
 
 
 
[Against orders dated 01.09.2022 and 06.09.2022 passed by the 
High Court of Sindh, Bench at Sukkur and Circuit Court Larkana 
in CPs No.D-1064, D-1068, D-1072, D-1075, D-1077, D-1080,  
D-1081, D-1083, D-1084, S-790, S-797 and S-792 of 2022]  
 
 
 
 
 
CP.943-K of 2022 
Province 
of 
Sindh 
through 
Chief 
Minister and others Vs. Sartaj Hyder 
 
 
CP.944-K of 2022 
Province 
of 
Sindh 
through 
Chief 
Secretary, Government of Sindh and 
others Vs. Babar Ali 
 
 
CP.945-K of 2022 
Province 
of 
Sindh 
through 
Chief 
Secretary, Government of Sindh and 
others Vs. Ali Raza Bhutto 
 
 
CP.946-K of 2022 
Province 
of 
Sindh 
through 
Chief 
Minister 
and 
others 
Vs. 
Shahid 
Hussain 
 
 
CP.947-K of 2022 
Province 
of 
Sindh 
through 
Chief 
Secretary, Government of Sindh and 
others Vs. Awaiz Ahmed 
 
 
CP.948-K of 2022 
Province 
of 
Sindh 
through 
Chief 
Secretary, Government of Sindh and 
others Vs. Muhammad Panjal 
 
 
CP.949-K of 2022 
Province 
of 
Sindh 
through 
Chief 
Secretary, Government of Sindh and 
others Vs. Shoaib 
 
 
CP.950-K of 2022 
Province 
of 
Sindh 
through 
Chief 
Minister and others Vs. Munawar Ali 
Pathan 
 
 
CP.951-K of 2022 
Province 
of 
Sindh 
through 
Chief 
Minister and others Vs. Jhando Khan 
 
 
CP.952-K of 2022 
Province 
of 
Sindh 
through 
Chief 
Secretary and others Vs. Inayatullah 
 
 
CP.953-K of 2022 
Province 
of 
Sindh 
through 
Chief 
Secretary Government of Sindh and 
others Vs. Sarfraz Khan 
 
 
CPs No.943-K of 2022, etc 
 
- 2 - 
CP.954-K of 2022 
Province 
of 
Sindh 
through 
Chief 
Secretary Sindh and others Vs. Rafique 
Ahmed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the Petitioner(s) 
: Mr. Hassan Akbar, AG., Sindh  
(via video link from Karachi) 
 
Iqbal Memon, Commissioner Karachi 
Maqsood Soomro (PDMA Sindh) 
(via video link from Karachi) 
 
 
 
For the Respondent(s) 
: Mr. Ghulam Shabbir Sher, ASC 
(in CP.943-K of 2022) 
 
Nemo (in remaining cases) 
 
  
Amicus Curiae 
: Mr. Faisal Siddique, ASC 
 
  
Date of Hearing 
: 21.10.2022 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
 
AYESHA A. MALIK, J.- The instant Civil Petition 
(CP No.943-K of 2022) along with connected Petitions impugns 
interim orders dated 01.09.2022 and 06.09.2022, passed by the 
High Court of Sindh, Bench at Sukkur and Circuit Court 
Larkana (High Court). The orders have been passed in petitions 
filed by the Respondents in relation to the relief work carried 
out by the Petitioners in the flood affected areas of Sindh, 
mainly Khairpur, Ghotki and Naushahro Feroze.   
2. 
 
The Petitioners before the Court are the Province of 
Sindh and Director General, Provincial Disaster Management 
Authority (PDMA), amongst others, whose grievance against the 
impugned orders is that the Court has directed the relevant 
Commissioners to constitute a citizens committee in every 
Taluka 
of 
Sukkur 
Division, 
Larkana 
Division, 
Shaheed 
Benazirabad Division and Naushahro Feroze District and 
directed that such citizens committee be headed by a Civil 
Judge and that the said committees work under the supervision 
CPs No.943-K of 2022, etc 
 
- 3 - 
of the concerned District and Sessions Judge. The Petitioners 
are also aggrieved with the directions given that the citizens 
committees are to look after the affairs of the tent city. Mr. 
Hassan Akhtar, Advocate General Sindh, argued that the 
impugned orders have placed the Provincial and District 
administration, responsible for disaster management including 
the provision of relief work under the control of the citizens 
committees which are headed by Civil Judges. Consequently, 
the Court has exceeded its jurisdiction as it has directed judges 
to enter the domain of the executive by requiring them to 
oversee relief work. He adds that the orders were beyond the 
court’s jurisdiction and have placed relief efforts in the hands of 
the citizens committee. He explained that the Petitioners are 
striving hard to ensure that adequate relief is provided to the 
affected areas and that any lapse or deficiencies in the same are 
not on account of negligence or ineffective management by the 
Petitioners but are due to vastness of the area which is affected 
by the flooding coupled with the lack of resources. He elaborates 
that access to these areas is also an issue as roads, railway 
lines, bridges have been damaged or destroyed and large parts 
of these areas are under water. Despite these challenges, he 
states, that best efforts are being made and that these 
committees will hamper progress. He explained that distribution 
of relief items to the calamity affected areas is the responsibility 
of the District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA) and the 
PDMA coordinates all relevant departments for actions required 
in response to the floods. As per the record of the Government 
CPs No.943-K of 2022, etc 
 
- 4 - 
of Sindh, there has been an unprecedented amount of rainfall in 
the month of July and August 2022 with 307% and 561% over 
and above the annual average, respectively. He stated that the 
recent spell of rain has impacted the entire Province of Sindh 
such that 30 districts are under water which has led to loss of 
infrastructure and resources and has brought about a 
humanitarian crisis. He further submits that there is a legal 
framework in place under the National Disaster Management 
Authority Act, 2010 (Act) whereby the PDMA and the DDMA are 
functional and are carrying out relief work. He added that as 
per notification dated 24.06.2014 issued by the Government of 
Sindh, Services, General Administration and Coordination 
Department, two representatives from the business community, 
three representatives from the civil society organisations and 
two representatives from the agriculture sector are nominated 
as members of the DDMA. Hence, he states, that civil society is 
already a part of the existing framework and so there was no 
reason to make a citizens committee.   
3. 
 
On behalf of the Respondents, who are affectees of 
the calamity affected areas of districts of the Province of Sindh, 
it is stated that no relief work is being provided in their area, 
hence, petitions were 
filed seeking directions that the 
Petitioners take immediate action to provide food and shelter to 
the residents of the area and also to drain out the water from 
the lands of the Respondents so that they are able to inhabit 
and cultivate their lands once again. Discriminatory acts of the 
PDMA Sukkur have been highlighted by the Respondents; one 
CPs No.943-K of 2022, etc 
 
- 5 - 
of them, has also stated that the government hierarchy is only 
saving the lands of the political elite by diverting water towards 
the villagers’ land; that half of the draining disposal machines 
are out of order; that proper evaluation of loss of the affected 
areas is also required for rehabilitation purposes. Ghulam 
Shabbir, Advocate High Court, one of the residents of Dadu 
District, has filed CMA No.7960 of 2022 for impleading him as 
party to bring on record the destruction of his district and 
failure of the government in its rehabilitation. He adds that 
there is no presence of the PDMA or the DDMA in his district 
despite the fact they have prepared documents relating to 
contingency plan and disaster management plan yet nothing 
has been implemented in this area.   
4. 
 
Mr. Faisal Siddiqui, ASC was appointed as amicus 
curiae by the Court vide order dated 05.10.2022 to assist on the 
issue of the courts’ jurisdiction to establish citizens committee. 
He has submitted his report and argued that the issue raised by 
the Petitioners is the role assigned to judicial officers in the 
impugned orders and the controlling powers given to the 
District 
and 
Sessions 
Judge 
to 
supervise 
the 
citizens 
committees as well as the work of the tent city/relief camp. He 
states that the courts are always reluctant to interfere in ad-
interim orders except in exceptional circumstances. As per his 
opinion, the citizens committees are in the nature of 
commissions which this Court has established as was seen in 
cases reported as Marvi Memon v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 
2011 SC 854) where a commission was established, following 
CPs No.943-K of 2022, etc 
 
- 6 - 
the 
floods 
of 
2010, 
for 
fact 
finding 
and 
submitting 
recommendations for relief efforts; Petition regarding miserable 
condition of the schools: in re CP. No.37 of 2012 (2013 SCMR 
764) where multiple commissions were established to carry out 
surveys of school functioning for fact finding purposes in order 
to assess the conditions and workings of the said schools; Dr. 
Akmal Saleemi and others v. Federal Government and others 
(2013 SCMR 103) where a commission was established for fact 
finding in a matter concerning extra judicial killings in the 
premises of Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa; and Suo Motu Case 
No.16 of 2011 along with CMAs (PLD 2013 SC 443) where a 
commission was constituted for fact finding purposes in order 
to assess if the lease agreements were legally sound. He stated 
that commissions are used for fact finding purposes, for putting 
together technical experts and also to propose sustainable 
solutions in environmental issues. He stated that commissions 
help build capacity to deal with extraordinary circumstances, as 
in the present case, and it will only facilitate relief work and not 
hamper it. He further stated that the directions of this Court 
vide its order dated 05.10.2022 requiring the citizens committee 
to continue their oversight of relief work should continue both 
with reference to relief efforts and the management of the tent 
cities as doing so will not only improve coordination efforts in 
this time of crisis but will also ensure that the ground-level 
issues are raised before the relevant authorities.  
5. 
 
We have heard all parties at length. The orders 
impugned are interim orders and this Court normally does not 
CPs No.943-K of 2022, etc 
 
- 7 - 
interfere with the interim orders of the High Court except in 
exceptional circumstances, as held in the cases reported as 
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Energy 
(Power Division), Islamabad and others v. Shafiq ul Hassan and 
others [2021 PLC (C.S.) 292] and Dossani Travels Pvt. Ltd and 
others v. Messrs Travels Shop (Pvt.) Ltd. and others (PLD 2014 
SC 1). Without a doubt, it is noted that, these are exceptional 
circumstances. While the interim orders exceed the jurisdiction 
of the Court to the extent of the role assigned to the judicial 
officers, the plight of the affectees of the 2022 floods needs 
attention in order to meet the needs of the flood affected 
population in Sindh. The biggest hindrance appears to be 
coordination and time frames for relief work as notwithstanding 
efforts made, it is neither sufficient nor is it effectively managed. 
The issue before the Court essentially is the exercise of 
jurisdiction by the High Court while creating the citizens 
committees and placing judges from the District Judiciary on 
these committees to oversee the work, being done by the 
committees. The role assigned to the judicial officers of 
overseeing the work of the executive by heading the citizens 
committees essentially means that the judicial officers are 
performing executive functions which is against the principle of 
separation of powers. The Constitution of the Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan, 1973 does not contemplate assumption of functions 
by one organ that essentially belongs to another. Moreover 
planning 
and 
strategy, 
coordination, 
monitoring 
and 
implementation are the functions of the executive and is best 
CPs No.943-K of 2022, etc 
 
- 8 - 
left for them to fulfil their duty and obligations in this regard. 
Furthermore, the work of these committees is a fulltime job 
which will require the judicial officers to spend time on these 
committees which in turn take them away from their judicial 
work that is also not practical nor expedient.  
6.  
 
We are informed that the relevant law on the subject 
is the Act, which establishes a National Disaster Management 
Commission (Commission) for the purposes of policy making. 
This Commission not only lays down the policy on disaster 
management but also approves a National Plan and Guidelines 
to be followed by the Federal and Provincial authorities in the 
event of a natural disaster. The Act also establishes a National 
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) which is responsible 
for implementing, co-ordinating and monitoring the National 
Plan and Policy. As per Section 13 of the Act, a Provincial 
Disaster Management Commission (PDMC) is established in 
each of the provinces, which lays down the Provincial Disaster 
Management Policy and also establishes the PDMA for the 
implementation, co-ordination and monitoring of the national as 
well as provincial plan in the event of a natural disaster. Section 
18 of the Act constitutes the DDMA which works at the district 
level and is responsible for the preparation of Disaster 
Management Plan for the district, as well as implementing, co-
ordinating and monitoring the National, Provincial and District 
plans at the district level. As per the powers and functions of 
the DDMA, they are required to provide relief to the community 
in response to any disaster, which includes shelter, food, 
CPs No.943-K of 2022, etc 
 
- 9 - 
drinking water and essential provisions, healthcare and 
services. They are also required to establish emergency 
communication systems and carry out relief efforts along with 
rescue operations in the area. Subsequent to the creation of the 
NDMA, a National Disaster Risk Reduction Policy was passed in 
2013, which seeks to reduce vulnerabilities and increase 
resilience in the event of a natural disaster. It also provides 
guidelines for timely intervention and for reducing disaster risk. 
Additionally, a Disaster Management Strategy (2015 to 2022) 
was framed and a National Policy Guideline on Vulnerable 
Groups in Disasters 2014 (Policy Guidelines) was framed 
which stresses on the importance of dealing with vulnerable 
members of the community in the face of a natural disaster.  
7.  
 
Despite the legal framework formed under the Act, 
the real issue is the lack of coordination and information with 
respect to the relief efforts being made by the Petitioners. It was 
argued before us that there are many parts of the Province of 
Sindh where relief efforts have not reached and where there is 
no food or drinkable water, nor any health care. Some of the 
causes of concern voiced by the Respondents was that roads, 
drainage, irrigation systems and sanitation systems are 
damaged or destroyed by the heavy rains and flooding. The 
supply of provisions and drinkable water is not enough; families 
have been evacuated but face diseases in the tent cities such as 
dengue, malaria and gastroenteritis. The Petitioners have 
admitted that there is difficulty not only on account of 
accessibility but also on account of resources including human 
CPs No.943-K of 2022, etc 
 
- 10 - 
resources to deal with the unprecedented floods. In this 
background, we find that the formation of the citizens 
committees by the High Court, in principle, was to facilitate 
relief efforts in different areas within the Province of Sindh, 
however, the inclusion of the members of the District Judiciary 
was not required given that there is an entire legal framework 
under the Act to ensure relief work right down to the district 
level. As per the scheme of the Act, members of the civil 
community which include volunteers, NGOs, doctors and others 
can be made part of the Provincial and District Management 
Authorities to help relief efforts. The record shows that they 
have been included in the DDMA vide notification dated 
24.06.2014, however, there is no information on whether they 
actually participated. Section 3(2)(p) of the Act provides that 
National Commission shall also consist of representatives of 
civil society or any person appointed by the Prime Minister. As 
this is the policy making body, the inclusion of members of civil 
society on this Commission is imperative because for effective 
and efficient disaster management the inclusion of people likely 
to be affected is necessary not only for coordination, data 
collection and creating awareness but also to combine the 
efforts of the community and the authority in the event of a 
natural disaster. This gives civil society an opportunity to 
become 
part 
of 
the 
implementation, 
co-ordination 
and 
monitoring plan which only makes the work of the authority 
more effective. The Act also provides under Section 8 that the 
NDMA shall consist of members as may be prescribed by its 
CPs No.943-K of 2022, etc 
 
- 11 - 
chairperson. This Authority is headed by the Prime Minister, 
who can include any member as he deems appropriate. 
Similarly, at the provincial as well as the district level, the Act 
provides in its Sections 13 and 15 that members to the PDMA 
and DDMA may be nominated by the Chief Minister and by the 
District Authority to include any member as they deem 
appropriate. Under these provisions, members of civil society 
can be included not only on the Commission but also in the 
Authorities to ensure that relief work is carried out where 
required and to help in mitigating the effects of the natural 
disaster as well as work on rehabilitation of the affectees. 
Hence, inclusion of civil society is necessary.  
8.  
 
 These are unprecedented times, as per the United 
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 
more than 33 million people have been affected by the floods of 
which 14.5 million are in Sindh alone (ECHO Daily Flash of 25 
October 2022 – Pakistan). Furthermore, despite the fact that the 
Act has provided its framework since 2010, the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the PDMA and DDMA is questioned by affectees. 
There is merit in this argument as there appears to be no 
monitoring system in place. In this context, participation by the 
public in the PDMA and DDMA and even at the Commission 
level ensures that the affectees are able to bring first hand their 
vulnerabilities and priorities, which results in a more measured 
response and proper allocation of resources where required. It 
also gives the Authority greater insight into the affected 
communities enabling them to work more effectively and 
CPs No.943-K of 2022, etc 
 
- 12 - 
produce better result. Community participation is not only 
necessary for planning disaster management but also for 
implementing and monitoring purposes as it gives people the 
right to participate in the decisions that affect their lives. This 
creates more awareness and a sense of ownership and 
responsibility which is required, particularly in disaster 
management so to enhance effectiveness and engage the people 
with 
their 
communities 
to 
provide 
rescue, 
relief 
and 
rehabilitation efforts. Hence, citizens’ participation in the PDMA 
and DDMA can improve coordination and response which will 
enable the government authorities to provide relief work in a 
more effective and efficient manner. Moving forward, it is 
fundamental to the composition of the Commission, the NDMA, 
the PDMA and the DDMA that members of civil society are 
included in it.  
9.  
 
At present to deal with the issue in hand, the 
citizens committees can work with DDMA to the extent of 
monitoring, coordination efforts and ensure that relief work 
reaches the affectees, who do not have sufficient assistance at 
the moment. The committees can also facilitate the PDMA and 
the DDMA of Sindh in providing necessary information and data 
with reference to relief work and what is required which will 
improve the Authorities’ coordination with affected areas and 
communication with affected areas especially due to the 
challenges of accessibility and communication failure. The 
citizens committee can, therefore, monitor the efforts of the 
PDMA and the DDMA which will not only lead to better results 
CPs No.943-K of 2022, etc 
 
- 13 - 
in the relief work but will also create awareness within the 
affectees as to the manner in which the relief effort is being 
carried 
out 
will 
encourage 
them 
to 
participate. 
This 
participatory approach to a natural disaster humanizes the 
work of the authorities so that affectees are provided with real 
time relief that they need and not what the paperwork suggests. 
10. 
 
In this regard, we also note that the impugned 
orders have directed that the citizens committees should 
comprise of medical superintendents of the Taluka Hospital, 
Mukhtiarkar, focal person of PDMA and the President of the 
Taluka Bar Association. In this context, we find that the Policy 
Guidelines requires the participation of women in disaster 
management plan at all levels to ensure integration of the 
gender perspective. As per the Policy Guidelines, women are at a 
greater risk from natural disasters than men. They are 
vulnerable and victims in natural disasters but also play a 
significant role throughout the disaster management cycle, 
without being adequately recognized and included in the 
decision making. The Policy Guidelines also emphasizes on 
ensuring equal access to relief opportunities for victims without 
any discrimination which requires the needs of vulnerable 
groups to be targeted to ensure that their needs are attended, 
safeguarded and protected. As per the Policy Guidelines, 
women, children, older persons, persons with disabilities are all 
defined as vulnerable groups in disaster. The NDMA and 
National Disaster Risk Reduction Policy all emphasize on 
reducing risks and vulnerabilities of those who are marginalized 
CPs No.943-K of 2022, etc 
 
- 14 - 
which include women, children, older person, persons with 
disabilities and minorities, however, there is no report available 
on the actual efforts made during the last six months. A 
National Gender and Child cell framework was also formulated 
in 2013 to work towards the disaster preparedness and disaster 
risk reduction for which again there is no information on its 
working in the 2022 floods. Therefore, in line with the policies 
formulated, it is imperative that the citizens committees include 
women, older persons and persons with disabilities so that the 
required response is ensured and provided and that the Policy 
Guidelines formulated be implemented real time. In this 
context, we note that the affected areas require maternity and 
healthcare for women so there is an increased need for female 
doctors, trainers and caretakers to attend to the health 
concerns. Women are often subjected to gender-based violence 
and harassment in times of such calamities, therefore safety 
and security concerns are also of significance for which 
appropriate response is also required. In this context, although 
the framework exists, an effort must go into ensuring that it 
actually functions and fulfils its mandate. Accordingly, we find 
that the citizens committee should ensure the representation of 
the vulnerable groups, particularly of women, in order to 
strengthen its perspective.  
11.   
In view of the aforesaid, the impugned orders are 
modified to the extent that the citizens committee shall no more 
be headed by a Civil Judge notified by the District Judge 
concerned and the citizens committee shall no more work under 
CP No.943-K/2022, etc 
 
16 
 
Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J.- I have read the judgment 
authored by my learned colleague, Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik and I 
am in complete agreement with the same. However, I would be remiss if 
the dimension of climate change is not highlighted in the backdrop of the 
recent floods. Climate change is undoubtedly the most serious existential 
threat faced by Pakistan and the major cause of the recent floods.  
Therefore, any post-floods strategy must first and foremost propose a 
national strategy to deal with climate change today and tomorrow. The 
primary responsibility falls on the shoulders of the Ministry of Climate 
Change, Government of Pakistan, as well as, the National Disaster 
Management Authority (NDMA) to propose a national adaptation plan to 
avert the horrific devastation caused by floods this year and also to 
safeguard and protect the fundamental rights of the people from the 
wrath of climate change.  I, therefore, feel compelled to append this 
additional note in public and national interest.  
 
2. 
 
Pakistan was ranked in the top 10 most vulnerable countries 
on the “Global Climate Risk Index 2021”1 and the devastation caused by 
the recent floods in 2022 is distressing proof of the same. Research has 
found that the 5-day maximum rainfall over Sindh and Balochistan 
(Provinces of Pakistan) had become 75% more intense than it would have 
been had the climate not warmed by 1.2ºC, thereby directly connecting 
global warming to be a major cause of the recent floods of 2022 and the 
likelihood of its recurrence in the years to come2. The probability of such 
heatwaves has now substantially increased due to climate change, with 
future heatwaves being even more hotter compared to 20223, therefore, 
chances of similar extreme rainfall have also become more likely. 
According to the “Pakistan Floods 2022 Post-Disaster Needs Assessment” 
prepared by the Ministry of Planning Development and Special 
Initiatives, Government of Pakistan with the assistance of other 
international bodies such as the World Bank etc., the total damage from 
the floods is evaluated to be at PKR 3.2 trillion (US$14.9 billion), total 
loss at PKR 3.3 trillion (US$15.2 billion), and total needs for recovery and 
reconstruction at PKR 3.5 trillion (US$16.3 billion)4. The resulting food 
and health insecurity, the risk of food shortage and diseases pose 
                                                             
1 “Global Climate Risk Index | German Watch”, January 20, 2021. 
2 “Climate change likely increased extreme monsoon rainfall, flooding highly vulnerable communities in 
Pakistan | World Weather Attribution”, 2022. 
3 “Climate Change made devastating early heat in India and Pakistan 30 times more likely | World Weather 
Attribution”, 2022 
4 “Pakistan Floods 2022 Post-Disaster Needs Assessment | Ministry of Planning Development & Special 
Initiatives”, October, 2022. 
CP No.943-K/2022, etc 
 
17 
 
 
challenges that need serious and urgent attention5. In view of this 
unprecedented damage and the likelihood of its recurrence, it is 
imperative that serious and practical efforts are undertaken for 
prevention and adaptation against  such disasters induced by climate 
change. It is also expected that existing policies or mechanisms catering 
to food insecurity etc. are mobilized as soon as possible and if no such 
policies or mechanisms exist, then the respective State functionaries 
should take urgent action to formulate such policies and create such 
mechanisms to prevent further exacerbation of the losses and damage 
already suffered due to the floods and for sustainable rehabilitation. 
 
3. 
 
The existing climate change framework of Pakistan indicates 
that the Ministry of Climate Change, Government of Pakistan has 
formulated a National Climate Change Policy, updated in 2021, devising 
policy measures for climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
Furthermore, the Climate Change Act of 2017 (“Climate Change Act”) 
has established the Pakistan Climate Change Council and the Pakistan 
Climate Change Authority. The latter has been empowered to formulate 
adaptation and mitigation policies, plans etc., including the National 
Adaptation Plan, which the former shall approve and monitor. However, 
it seems that no substantial policies or plans have been formulated or 
implemented under the Climate Change Act. It is apparent that the 
measures in place are insufficient to cater to rapidly changing climate 
and its dire effects, therefore, there is a need for a coordinated joint effort 
in this regard. The National Disaster Management Act, 2010 (“Act”) itself 
does not expressly cater to climate change, nonetheless, the Act does 
provide for taking measures for prevention of disasters and mitigation. 
Section 6(2)(g) of the Act provides that the National Disaster Management 
Commission (“Commission”) may ‘take such other measures for the 
prevention of disaster or the mitigation or for preparedness … as it may 
consider necessary’. Prevention and mitigation have also been provided 
under provisions stipulating powers and functions of the Provincial 
Disaster Management Commission, the Provincial Disaster Management 
Authority and the District Disaster Management Authority established 
under the Act. Similarly, section 10(3)(a) stipulates that the National Plan 
shall include ‘measures to be taken for the prevention of disasters or the 
mitigation of their effects’ and section 17(3)(b) of the Act stipulates that 
the Provincial Plan shall include “the measures to be adopted for 
                                                             
5 Ibid.  
CP No.943-K/2022, etc 
 
18 
 
 
prevention and mitigation of disasters”. Although the National Disaster 
Management Plan, 2012 does refer to the increase in climate-related 
natural disasters, however, it falls short of devising any meaningful 
steps/directions to suggest adaptation measures to address and guard 
against the changing climate. Similarly, one of the policy objectives of the 
National Disaster Risk Reduction Policy, 2013 includes promoting 
development planning that considers and addresses risks alongside 
environmental and climate change concerns but there appears to be no 
plan or strategy  on the ground that has been formulated and put out in 
the public domain that deals with adaptation measures to be taken by 
the Government or the respective authorities  in order to ensure that the 
floods of 2022 are not repeated next year. The rehabilitation work has to 
be climate resilient and it must be a part of a master adaptation plan.  
The Pakistan Climate Crises Charter 2022 (“Charter”) published by the 
WWF provides a roadmap with the following actions: 
 
i. 
Advocate for loss and damage financing internationally 
ii. 
Address institutional governance issues  
iii. 
Develop an effective local government system 
iv. 
Map climate risks and vulnerabilities 
v. 
Prioritize and mainstream local level adaptation 
vi. 
Incorporate nature-based solutions in the development 
paradigm 
vii. 
Address vulnerabilities in disadvantaged communities 
viii. 
Mainstream crisis response across local communities 
ix. 
Address population management concerns 
The said Charter has been prepared in consultation with some of the 
following:- 
a) National Disaster Risk Management Fund 
b) Ministry of Planning, Development and Special Initiatives 
c) Ministry of Climate Change 
d) Pakistan Council for Research in Water Resources 
e) Centre for Disaster Management, University of Management and 
Technology, Lahore 
f) Population Council 
g) International Union for Conservation of Nature (Pakistan) 
h) World Wide Fund for Nature Pakistan 
i) Sustainable Development Policy Institute 
CP No.943-K/2022, etc 
 
19 
 
 
j) International Water Management Institute 
k) Global Water Partnership 
l) Pakistan Academy of Sciences 
m) Sustainable Development Policy Institute 
n) Global Change Impact Studies Centre 
Yet there is no policy or directive from the concerned Ministry supporting 
the said Charter or moving in this direction.    
 
4. 
 
Climate justice was an important consideration at the recent 
27th Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (“COP27”) which concluded with a 
significant and positive development through the formation of a loss and 
damage fund for climate-vulnerable developing countries6. Soon funds 
will be allocated to countries that have suffered loss and damage due to 
climate change. It is high time to develop a mechanism for the allocation 
of these funds and the identification of key adaptation infrastructural 
projects that will help build national climate resilience, especially against 
floods in the years to come. It is expected that the Ministry of Climate 
Change, Government of Pakistan shall drive this initiative and frame a 
policy and set up a mechanism to effectively and efficiently utilize such 
funds. Additionally, under section 11 of the Act, subject to the directions 
of the Commission, the National Disaster Management Authority 
(“NDMA”) is to lay down guidelines for minimum standards of relief to be 
provided to persons affected by disaster. The NDMA has formulated 
guidelines under this provision, such as the NDMA Guidelines for 
Minimum Ex-Gratia Assistance to the Persons Affected by Natural and 
Man-Made Disasters, 2016, and State functionaries, while operating 
under the said guidelines, are expected to promptly formulate a 
mechanism for provisioning of immediate relief to persons affected by 
climate-related disasters. It is therefore essential that these global funds 
are invested in building national climate resilience so that climate 
induced disasters can be minimized. Climate Change is a perhaps the 
most serious threat to the fundamental rights of the people in Pakistan. 
In order to protect their right to life and above all their right to dignity 
under Articles 9 and 14 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973, a climate resilient adaptation plan including a detailed 
mechanism for utilization of financial support coming to Pakistan from 
                                                             
6 “What you need to know about the COP27 Loss and Damage Fund | UN Environment Programme”, 
November 29, 2022. 
CP No.943-K/2022, etc 
 
20 
 
 
the loss and damage fund, is the need of the hour.  Having failed to learn 
from the floods in 2010, as has become apparent from the magnitude of 
the destruction caused by the recent floods, it is pivotal that effective 
steps are taken to prevent such catastrophes in the future. I hope the 
Federal Government will act with speed in this regard because in the 
words of Greta Thunberg,7 “our house is on fire.” 
5. 
 
This additional note be placed before the other members of 
the bench for their perusal. 
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Islamabad, 
21st October, 2022. 
Approved for reporting. 
Hassan 
                                                             
7 Greta Tintin Eleonora Ernman Thunberg is a Swedish environmental activist who is known for 
challenging world leaders to take immediate action for climate justice. 
