IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
(Appellate Jurisdiction)

PRESENT:

Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah

Mr. Justice Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi
Mr. Justice Irfan Saadat Khan

Civil Petitions No.1007 and 1112-L/2022
Against the judgment dated 14.1.2022 passed by
Punjab Service Tribunal, Lahore in Appeal

No.4490/2014

Pervaiz Hussain Shah (In CP 1007/12)

Secretary to Government of the Punjab Food (in CP 1112-L/22)

Department, Lahore, etc. ...Petitioner(s)
VERSUS

Secretary to Government of Punjab Food (In CP 1007/12)

Department Lahore and another

Pervaiz Hussain Shah (in CP 1112-L/22)

... Respondent(s)

For the Petitioner(s): Mr. Muhammad Aftab Alam Rana, ASC
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR

In person (in CP1112-L 2022)

For the Respondent(s): Barrister Mumtaz Ali, Addl. AG
Abdul Majid, DFC
M. Rizwan, Assistant
M. Nawaz, Assistant
In Person (in CP1112-L 2022)

Date of Hearing: 14.11.2023

DGMENT

Irfan Saadat Khan, J.- C.P. No. 1007/2022: Pervaiz Hussain Shah,
(“Petitioner”), and Secretary to Government of Punjab Food Department,
Lahore (“Respondent”), seek Leave to Appeal against the judgement of
the Punjab Service Tribunal, Lahore, (“Tribunal”) dated 14.01.2022,
(Impugned Judgement”), whereby the Tribunal had partially allowed
the Appeal of the Petitioner, in the following terms:

“Furthermore, it is not proved/alleged against the appellant that

to which extent his conduct has caused the financial loss to the

Government Exchequer, hence, he is only guilty of negligence.

Therefore, appeal in hand is partially allowed and the impugned

orders are modified in that punishment of “Withholding of 100%
Pension” is converted in “Withholding of 50% Pension”.”
Civil Petiti 1 -L/2022 py)

2 Briefly, the facts necessary to decide the matter before us are that
departmental proceedings were initiated against the Petitioner along with
4 others under the provisions of the Punjab Employees Efficiency,
Discipline, and Accountability Act, 2006 (“PEEDA”) on the charges of
inefficiency, misconduct, and corruption. An inquiry into the matter was
conducted by a 3-member Inquiry Committee, and vide its Order, dated
10.06.2014, the Petitioner was given the punishment of having the
entirety of his pension withheld, as per Section 4(1)(c)(i) of PEEDA.!
Aggrieved by the Order, the Petitioner filed a departmental Appeal before
Chief Secretary, Punjab. The said Appeal was not decided within the
stipulated period; therefore, the Petitioner approached the Tribunal by
filing a service Appeal.

3. The aforementioned service Appeal was dismissed by the Tribunal,
via its consolidated judgement dated 21.05.2019, along with those of 4
others. The judgment passed by the Tribunal was then challenged before
this Court through Civil Appeals Nos. 2125 to 2129 of 2019. This Court,

vide Order dated 12.02.2021, dismissed Civil Appeals Nos. 2125 to 2127

of 2019; whereas Civil Appeal No. 2128 of 2019 stood abated, due to the
death of the Appellant in the said Appeal. As for Civil Appeal No. 2129 of
2019, which was that of the present Petitioner, the matter was remanded
to the Tribunal for deciding it afresh in accordance with the law.

4. It has now transpired that the Tribunal partially allowed the
Appeal that was remanded to it by this Court, in the aforementioned
terms.2 However, the Petitioner is dissatisfied with the fate of the said

Appeal; hence, the present Civil Petition.

14, Penalties — (1) The competent authority may, notwithstanding anything contained in
any law or the terms and conditions of service of the accused, by an order in writing,
impose one or more of the following penalties, namely:-

enalties after retirement-
(i) withholding of pension or any part thereof

2 Paragraph 1 of this Judgment.
Civil Petitions No. 1007 and 1112-L/2022 3

5. Mr. Muhammad Iqbal Aftab Alam Rana, ASC, appeared on behalf
of the Petitioner and stated that since the Tribunal concluded that the
allegation upon the Petitioner of embezzlement and benefiting of said
embezzlement was not proved, and that the Petitioner was held guilty of
negligence only, therefore, withholding 50% of the Petitioner’s pension
merely on the basis of negligence was quite harsh and not in accordance
with the law. Hence, the learned Counsel has prayed for the entirety of
the Petitioner’s pension to be restored by reiterating that withholding
50% of the Petitioner’s pension in view of his service background and
unblemished career was unjustified.

6. On the other hand, Additional Advocate General Punjab
(‘Additional AGP”) states that since the Petitioner was the District Food
Controller (“DFC”) of Rahimyar Khan, and embezzlement of wheat stock,
bardana, and other stock articles happened under his watch and
supervision from PR Centre Rahimyar Khan, therefore, some
responsibility had to be attributed to him for the misappropriation that
took place during scheme year 2011-2012. The Additional AGP further
stated that even if one were to assume, for argument’s sake, that the
Petitioner was not on site when the said misappropriation took place, he
could not be entirely absolved from the said misappropriation since it
was the Petitioner’s job as DFC to keep a watchful eye over the stock.
Hence, the Additional AGP was of the view that the Petition filed by the
Petitioner is liable to be dismissed whereas that filed by the department
may be allowed and the Impugned Judgement be modified to hold that
the entirety of the Petitioner’s pension be withheld instead of 50%.

es We have heard the learned Counsel for both the parties and have
perused the record with their assistance.

8. The expression "negligence" in fact connotes a dearth of
attentiveness and alertness or disdain for duty. The genus of

accountability and responsibility differentiates and augments an act of
Civil Petitions No.1007 and 1112-L/2022 4

gross negligence to a high intensity rather than an act of ordinary
negligence. To establish gross negligence, the act or omission must be of
a worsened genre whereas ordinary negligence amounts to an act of
inadvertence or failure of taking on the watchfulness and cautiousness
which by and large a sensible and mindful person would bring into play
under the peculiar set of circumstances. Furthermore, Lord President
Clyde in Hunter v Hanley? vis-a-vis negligence, observed: “in relation to
professional negligence I regard the phrase ‘gross negligence’ only as
indicating so marked a departure from the normal standard of conduct of
a professional man as to infer a lack of that ordinary care which a man of
ordinary skill would display.”5

9. In view of the facts before us, we find ourselves in agreement with
the Tribunal’s observation that the physical absence of the Petitioner at
the time of the embezzlement of wheat stock, bardana, and other stock
articles, was justified as given his position, as the DFC, the Petitioner
had to visit other districts, on the directions of departmental higher-ups
and could not be available at all the sites under his supervision, at the
same time. However, being in a supervisory position comes with the
added burden of keeping track of all things that fall under the
supervisor’s supervision, which in the instant case would be keeping
track of wheat stock, bardana, and other stock articles. Therefore, the
Petitioner’s absence from the site of embezzlement, albeit due to the
nature of his job, cannot be used as a handy excuse to absolve himself of
the loss caused to the public exchequer. Nevertheless, we are of the view,
that the Petitioner’s negligence is not ‘gross negligence’ as outlined

above, given that the Petitioner’s conduct was not ‘so marked a departure

3The Postmaster General Sindh Province, Karachi v. Syed Farhan (2022 SCMR 1154).
4Hunter v. Hanley (1955 S.L.T 213).
5Stroud’s Judicial Dictionary of Words and Phrases, 10th Edition, Volume 2, (pp. 816).
Civil Petitions Ni 7 and 1112-L/2022 5

from the normal standard of conduct of a professional man as to infer a
lack of that ordinary care which a man of ordinary skill would display.’ ©
10. This Court in Sabir Iqbal has held that an administrative measure

must not be more drastic than necessary or to sum up in a phrase - not
taking a sledgehammer to crack a nut.” However, the 3-member Inquiry
Committee, vide its Order, dated 10.06.2014, after having considered all
the facts before it and listening to the contentions of the accused, found
that allegations against the Petitioner had been proved beyond any
shadow of doubt and imposed the major penalty of withholding 100% of
his pension.® In our view, the Inquiry Committee’s decision was not only
disproportionate but also unreasonable; thus, seeing it fit to use a
sledgehammer to crack a nut. It is now a settled proposition of law that a
penalty should be proportionate to the guilt. Since the current
constitutional era has been termed as the ‘age of proportionality’,? the
modern notion of proportionality requires that the punishment ought to
reflect the degree of moral culpability associated with the offence for
which it is imposed. !°

11. Moreover, the Inquiry Committee’s decision fails the tests of
proportionality, suitability, and necessity as laid down in Sabir Iqbal: 1!

“According to De Smith’s Judicial Review, the standards of
proportionality and unreasonableness are inextricably intertwined.
Unreasonableness contains two elements of proportionality when
it requires the weight of relevant considerations to be fairly
balanced and when it forbids unduly oppressive decisions. Under
the first element, proportionality is a test requiring the decision-
maker to maintain a fair balance. Under this category the courts
evaluate whether manifestly disproportionate weight has been
attached to one or other considerations relevant to the decision.
The second element is that the courts consider whether there has
been a disproportionate interference with the claimants rights or
interests. A more sophisticated version of proportionality provides
for a structured test. Here the courts ask first whether the
measure, which is being challenged, is suitable to attaining the
identified ends (the test of suitability). Suitability here includes the

6 Thid.

7 Sabir Iqbal v. Cantonment Board, Peshawar (PLD 2019 SC 189).

8 The Petitioner retired from service on 20.06.2013.

9 Kremnitzer, M., Steiner, T., Lang, A. (2022). Proportionality in action: Comparative
and Empirical Perspectives on the Judicial Practice (pp. 1). Cambridge University Press.
10 Divisional Superintendent, Postal Services v. Nadeem Raza (2023 SCMR 803).

11 Thid.
Civil Petitions No.1007 and 1112-L/2022 6

notion of “rational connection” between the means and ends. The

next step asks whether the measure is necessary and whether a

less restrictive or onerous method could have been adopted (the

test of necessity - requiring minimum impairment of the rights or

interest in question).”
12. This brings us to the question of withheld pension, as prayed for
the Additional AGP and as decided by the Tribunal. Pension is a regular
payment made to a person or to a deceased person’s dependants,
especially by a government or an employer, in consideration of past
services or for disability, poverty, or other charitable reasons. It is to be

noted that pension is not a bounty;!5 it should be considered as a
recognition of the satisfactory service of the retiring person. Furthermore,
vis-a-vis pension in The Government of N.W.F.P. through the Secretary to
the Government of N.W.F.P Communications and Works Departments,
Peshawar"? it was held:

“it is a right acquired after putting in satisfactory service for the
prescribed minimum period.”

We find ourselves in disagreement with the view of the learned Additional
AGP that the entirety of the Petitioner’s pension be withheld, and also
disagree with the Tribunal’s decision of withholding the Petitioner’s
pension at 50% for the entirety of his pension entitlement period. If the
case before us were that of ‘gross negligence’ on the part of the Petitioner
only then would the learned Additional AGP’s prayer warrant acceptance
and the Tribunal’s decision be proportionate. In the decision rendered in
Auditor-General of Pakistan!5 this Court held:

“The element of bad faith and willfulness may bring an act
of negligence within the purview of misconduct but lack of
proper care and vigilance may not always be willful to make
it a case of grave negligence inviting service punishment.
The philosophy of punishment is based on the concept of
retribution, which may be either through the method of
deterrence or reformation. The purpose of deterrent

12 Shorter Oxford English Dictionary on Historical Principles, 6t Edition, Volume 2 (pp.
2149). Oxford University Press.

13 The Federation of Pakistan thr. the General Manager/Operations Pakistan Railways
v. Shah Mohammad (2021 SCMR 1249).

14 The Government of N.W.F.P. through the Secretary to the Government of N.W.F.P.
Communications and Works Departments, Peshawar v. Mohamad Said Khan (PLD 1973
SC 514).

15 aot iid of Pakistan v. Muhammad Ali (2006 SCMR 63).
Civil Petitions No. 1007 and 1112-L/2022 7

punishment is not only to maintain balance with the gravity
of wrong done by a person but also to make an example for
others as a preventive measure for reformation of the
society, whereas the concept of minor punishment in the
law is to make an attempt to reform the individual wrong
doer. In service matters, the extreme penalty for minor acts
depriving a person from right of earning would definitely
defeat the reformatory concept of punishment in
administration of justice. In view thereof, we would not take
any exception to the view of the matter taken by the
Tribunal.”

13. Presently, Section 4(1)(c)(i) of PEEDA,!® provides for:

(i) withholding of pension or any part thereof [for a specific period
keeping in view the loss caused to the Government];

(Emphasis Added)

In the aforementioned provision of PEEDA, the following: ‘for a specific
period keeping in view the loss caused to the Government’ was inserted
by the Punjab Employees Efficiency, Discipline, and Accountability
(Amendment) Act, 2017, (“Amended Act”).17 A bare perusal of the
Amended Act shows that it was curative in nature, further evidenced by
its preamble.!8 A curative act is generally passed to provide some
correction or omission made in the existing statute.19 Furthermore, acts
of this character are obviously retroactive, and hence entitled, as general
rule, to retrospective operation.2° In Rajby Industries?! this court held:

“It is well settled that the curative statute is meant for
lawmakers to recuperate the prior enactment for rectifying
the defect or omission. In order to find out whether any
beneficial, remedial or curative legislation has a
retrospective effect, the litmus test is to explore whether it
is intended to clear up an ambiguity or oversight in the
prevailing or standing law and in its pith and substance, it
corrects or modifies an existing law or an error that
interferes with interpreting or applying the statute. For
sure, its scope is clarificatory in nature but if it has no such
character or essence, it cannot be deduced to be retroactive
merely for the reason that it amounts to beneficial
legislation. The retroactive application of curative legislation
can be gauged and measured from the plain language and

16 Amended Act published in the Punjab Gazette (Extraordinary), dated: 08 November

2017, (pp. 3151-3152), s.2.

17 Thid.

18 Tt is necessary further to amend the Punjab Employees Efficiency, Discipline, and

Accountability Act, 2006 (XII of 2006) for purposes of specifying the period after which

certain punishments shall cease to have effect, for expressly providing that a former
ployee shall also have a right of appeal; and, for the matters appearing hereinafter.

19 Understanding Statutes, 4 Edition, S.M. Zafar, (pp. 234).

20 Tid.

21 Rajby Industries Karachi v. Federation of Pakistan (2023 SCMR 1407).
Civil Petiti 1007 1112-L/2022 8

intention of legislature. It is by and large passed to supply a
conspicuous omission or to elucidate misgivings as to the
meaning of the previous law.”
The Amended Act’s provision of a timeframe with regards to a major
penalty of withholding pension, in our view is intended to clear up the
ambiguity, vis-a-vis as to how long can pension be withheld as a penalty,
in the pre-amended PEEDA, and thus qualifies the test laid down by this
court of being retrospective in nature.
14. Hence, keeping in mind the retrospectivity of the Amended Act and
the effect of the Petitioner’s negligence, we convert this Petition into
Appeal and partly allow the same, by modifying the Impugned
Judgement, in the following terms:

“The Petitioner’s pension be confined to 50% from the period
of service ranging 2014 to 2016,?2 only; whereas, pension for
the remainder of his service, apart from the aforementioned
period of service, will be paid in its entirety, i.e. 100% by the
department.”

15. C.P. No. 1112-L/2022: In view of what has been observed and held
above, the Civil Petition filed by the department stands dismissed. The

parties are left to bear their own costs.

Judge

dudge

Nudge.

ISLAMABAD
14% Nov., 2023
Arshed/A.J.K,LC

“Approved for Reporting”

22 Since the Inquiry Committee’s Order recommending withholding of 100% pension
came on 10.06.2014, and the Petitioner had retired from service on 20.06.2013, we find
it appropriate to hold that a 2-year penalty is proportionate to the Petitioner’s
negligence; therefore, only the pension for a period of 2 years from the said date, i.e.
10.06.2014 to 10.06.2016, should be withheld at 50%.
