IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction) 
 
 
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL, CJ 
MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD ALI MAZHAR 
MRS. JUSTICE AYESHA A. MALIK 
 
 
 
CIVIL PETITIONS NO.1920 TO 1924 OF 2022  
Against the Judgment dated 09.03.2022 passed by 
the Islamabad High Court, Islamabad in I.T.R. Nos. 
205, 208, 206, 209, 207/2015) 
 
 
 
M/s Islamabad Electric Supply Company Limited 
(IESCO) through its Finance Director, Islamabad 
…Petitioner 
                                
   (In all cases) 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
The Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue (H.Q), 
Islamabad through its Chairman and others            …Respondents 
 
(In all cases) 
 
 
 
 
For the Petitioner:  
 
Mr. Haseeb Shakoor Paracha, ASC 
 
 
 
 
 
(In all cases)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the Respondents: 
Dr. Farhat Zafar, ASC 
 
Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR 
 
(In all cases) 
 
Mr. Naeem Hasan Secretary (Lit), 
FBR 
     
                      
Date of Hearing:              
 10.08.2022 
 
 
                                         
JUDGMENT 
 
MUHAMMAD ALI MAZHAR, J:- These five Civil Petitions for leave 
to appeal are directed against the common judgment dated 
09.03.2022, passed by the learned Islamabad High Court, 
Islamabad in I.T.R. Nos. 205, 208, 206, 209, 207/2015), whereby 
the I.T.Rs were answered in the negative.  
 
2.  The compendiously and tersely enunciated facts necessary for 
disposal of these civil petitions are that the petitioner is a public 
limited company dealing in the supply of electricity to the 
consumers. The respondent No.3 initiated the proceedings under 
C.Ps.1920 to 1924/2022 
-2- 
 
Section 161 and 205 of the Income Tax Ordinance 2001 
(“Ordinance”), He passed the order and created the tax demand for 
payment against non-deduction of withholding tax, including 
default surcharge under Sections 161 and 205 read with Section 
124 of the Ordinance. Being aggrieved, the petitioner filed appeals 
before the respondent No.2 but could not succeed, thereafter, the 
appeals were filed before the respondent No.1 (Appellate Tribunal 
Inland Revenue) which were also decided against the petitioner 
vide order dated 13.03.2015. As a last resort, the petitioner filed 
aforesaid Income Tax References in the learned High Court but the 
question of law framed in the Tax References was also answered in 
negative, while upholding the order passed by the learned 
Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue. 
 
3. The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the both the 
learned High Court and the learned Appellate Tribunal Inland 
Revenue failed to consider that the order under Sections 161 and 
205 of Ordinance cannot be passed without initiating proceedings 
under Section 177 of the Ordinance which is a precondition before 
taking any adverse action under Sections 161 and 205. It was 
further contended that the lower fora passed the orders without 
considering the relevant provisions of law and all impugned orders 
are based on assumptions and guess work only. The petitioner was 
imposed a tax liability without any definite information which 
amounted to double taxation. He further argued that as per Rule 
44 of the Income Tax Rules, 2002 (“Rules”), the learned 
respondent No. 3 should have sought the reconciliation of  
amounts which were put on view in the annual and monthly 
statements of withholding tax. Simultaneously, he argued that the 
operations of the petitioner are spread in 52 locations and the 
record and information send for by the department was too 
voluminous thus it was not possible for the petitioners to produce 
huge record in the prescribed form.  
 
4. Heard the arguments. The learned High Court by means of a 
consolidated impugned judgment dealt with aforesaid Income Tax 
Reference Applications, pertaining to the tax demand for the years 
2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012. In order to resolve the 
difference of opinion, the learned High Court framed the following 
common question of law in the Reference Applications:- 
C.Ps.1920 to 1924/2022 
-3- 
 
  
 
“Whether under the facts and circumstances of the 
case, was the Respondent No.1 justified to hold 
Proceedings and Pass Order under Section 161/205 
without proceedings under Section 177 of the ITO, 
2001?” 
 
 
5. The bone of contention is precisely confined to the question of 
law framed by the learned High Court with regard to the invocation 
of the machinery provided under Section 161, without recourse to 
Section 177 of the Ordinance. In fact, Section 160 of the Ordinance 
is provided in Division IV of the Ordinance which is predominately 
germane to the General Provisions Relating to the Advance 
Payment of Tax or the Deductions of Tax at Source. Where a 
person fails to collect tax as required under the modalities and 
procedure envisaged under Section 161, he shall be personally 
liable to pay the amount of tax to the Commissioner who may 
proceed to recover the same but, before making any such recovery 
he has to provide an opportunity of being heard to the defaulter. 
For the ease of reference, Section 161 of Ordinance is reproduced 
as under:- 
 
 
“161. Failure to pay tax collected or deducted.— 
 
(1) Where a person-- 
 
(a) fails to collect tax as required under Division II of 
this  Part [or Chapter XII] or deduct tax from a 
payment as required under Division III of this Part [or 
Chapter XII] [or as required under section 50 of the 
repealed Ordinance]; or 
 
(b) having collected tax under Division II of this Part 
[or Chapter XII] or deducted tax under Division III of 
this Part for Chapter XII] fails to pay the tax to the 
Commissioner as required under section 160, [or 
having collected tax under section 50 of the repealed 
Ordinance pay to the credit of the Federal Government 
as required under sub-section (8) of section 50 of the 
repealed Ordinance,] 
 
the person shall be personally liable to pay the amount 
of tax to the Commissioner [who may [pass an order to 
that effect and] proceed to recover the same]. 
 
[(1A) No recovery under sub-section (1) shall be made 
unless the person referred to in sub-section (1) has 
been provided with an opportunity of being heard. 
 
C.Ps.1920 to 1924/2022 
-4- 
 
(1B) Where at the time of recovery of tax under sub-
section (1) it is established that the tax that was to be 
deducted from the payment made to a person or 
collected from a person has meanwhile been paid by 
that person, no recovery shall be made from the 
person who had failed to collect or deduct the tax but 
the said person shall be liable to pay [default 
surcharge] at the rate of [twelve] per cent per annum 
from the date he failed to collect or deduct the tax to 
the date the tax was paid.] 
 
(2) A person personally liable for an amount of tax 
under sub-section (1) as a result of failing to collect or 
deduct the tax shall be entitled to recover the tax from 
the person from whom the tax should have been 
collected or deducted. 
 
[(3) The Commissioner may, after making, or causing 
to be made, such enquiries as he deems necessary, 
amend or further amend an order of recovery under 
sub-section (1), if he considers that the order is 
erroneous in so far it is prejudicial to the interest of 
revenue: 
 
Provided that the order of recovery shall not be 
amended, unless the person referred to in sub-section 
(1) has been provided an opportunity of being heard.” 
 
 
 
6. In unison, Section 165 of the Ordinance envisages that every 
person 
collecting 
or 
deducting 
tax 
shall 
furnish 
to 
the 
Commissioner a quarterly statement in the prescribed form set out 
in the said Section. The proceedings initiated by the Deputy 
Commissioner (IR) under Section 161 and 205 read with section 
124 of the Ordinance reflect that the Principal Officer of the 
petitioner was confronted with the Audited Accounts electronically 
filed for the concerned tax years showing huge payments of 
operating cost and P & L expenses, which were cross-matched with 
the withholding statements, and Income Tax Returns, whereby it 
was found that petitioner had not discharged their responsibility 
as a withholding agent in the prescribed manner. It was further 
pointed out by the Deputy Commissioner (IR) that in the 
withholding annual statements the petitioner failed to mention 
CPR Numbers, therefore the petitioner was called upon to file 
documentary evidence of payments with CPR Numbers, so that the 
tax deduction amount could be verified and credit of tax deduction 
could be allowed accordingly. The record further reflects that the 
proceedings under Section 161 and 205 of the Ordinance were 
finalized and an order was issued with the tax demand, however, 
C.Ps.1920 to 1924/2022 
-5- 
 
on an appeal filed before the Commissioner with the plea of not 
providing 
reasonable 
opportunity 
of 
being 
heard, 
the 
Commissioner Inland Revenue (Appeals), remanded the matter 
with the direction that documents should be obtained and, after 
providing reasonable opportunity of hearing, the order should be 
passed afresh. After remand, the petitioner was asked to provide 
detail of payments made on account of various expenses with 
relevant supporting documents but the petitioner repeatedly asked 
for adjournments on one pretext or another and avoided 
submitting relevant documents or an explanation on the issue of 
non-deduction/non-collection of tax as required under the 
Ordinance. The order of the Deputy Commissioner (IR) passed after 
remand put on show at least eleven adjournments which were 
entreated by the petitioner for submitting the documents or 
required data but neither did they provide any such record, nor did 
they submit any explanation for non-deduction of tax. The 
Appellate Order of the Commissioner Inland Revenue also pointed 
out that the taxpayer was afforded various opportunities to provide 
the relevant documents, failing which the officer had no option but 
to close the proceedings on the basis of the available facts. 
Concomitantly, the learned Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue also 
expressed the same views that sufficient opportunities were 
provided to the taxpayer but they failed to provide relevant 
documents or details, hence no option was left except to pass the 
order on the basis of the available record. 
  
 
7. If we flick through Section 165 of the Ordinance, in collocation 
with Rule 44 of the Rules, it educates that a person responsible for 
collecting or deducting tax under Division II or Division III of Part V 
of Chapter X of the Ordinance or under Chapter XII of the 
Ordinance shall furnish or e-file a biannual statement as set out in 
Part X of the Second Schedule to the Rules. According to the 
niceties of sub-rule (3), the statement shall be accompanied by the 
evidence of deposit of tax collected or deducted to the credit of the 
Federal Government, whereas sub-rule (4) explicates that a person 
required to furnish the statement shall, whenever required by the 
Commissioner, furnish a reconciliation of the amounts mentioned 
in the biannual statement with the amounts mentioned in the 
C.Ps.1920 to 1924/2022 
-6- 
 
return of income, statements, related annexes and other 
documents submitted from time to time.  
 
 
8. It is somewhat prominent that no drastic action can be triggered 
under Section 161 of the Ordinance unless the person is provided 
with an opportunity of being heard. In the case of the petitioner too 
the Tax Authority, after affording ample opportunities of hearing, 
raised the demand after complying with the requirements of due 
process of law, and thereafter passed the orders in accordance 
with the procedure and mechanism provided under Section 161 of 
the Ordinance.  
 
 
9. Now we will engage in the exactitude of Section 177 of the 
Ordinance which is predominantly related to the audit exercise, 
whereby the Commissioner may call for any record or documents 
including books of account maintained under this Ordinance for 
conducting audit of the income tax affairs of a person but after 
recording reasons in writing and, as a precondition, the said 
reasons shall be communicated to the taxpayer while calling for 
the record or documents including books of accounts of the 
taxpayer. However, the proviso to sub-section (1) clarified that no 
record shall be called after expiry of six years from the end of the 
tax year to which they relate.  
 
 
10. The legislature has not put into effect any precondition under 
Section 177 of the Ordinance to embark on an audit exercise first, 
and then start off proceedings under Section 161 of the Ordinance.  
The well recognized rule of construction or interpretation of any 
statute or its particular provision is that the intention of the 
legislature must be discovered from the words used. If the words 
used are capable of one construction only, then it would not be 
open to the courts to adopt any other hypothetical construction. If 
the words of a statute or its any provision are readily understood 
without any ambiguity, then obviously, it is not for the court to 
raise any doubt as to what they mean for any contrary view, rather 
than implementing the same without any hesitation. A statute or 
any enacting provision must be so construed as to make it 
effectual and operational. Lord Denning in the case of Fawcett 
Properties v. Buckingham County Council. [1961] AC 636, held that 
“when a statute has some meaning even though it is obscure, or 
several meanings, even though there is little to choose between 
C.Ps.1920 to 1924/2022 
-7- 
 
them, the courts have to say what meaning the statute is to bear, 
rather than reject it as a nullity.” The legislature doesn’t use 
superfluous or insignificant words in a provision or statute and 
therefore, while interpreting any word or terms in a statute a 
construction that makes the statute operative and the words 
pertinent must be preferred to the one that renders the words 
ineffective, void and useless. It is also significant to refer to the 
legal maxim “ut res magis valeat quam pereat” which expounds 
that it is better for a thing to have effect than to be made void or it 
is better to validate a thing than to invalidate it. A statute is 
supposed to be an authentic repository of the legislative will and 
the function of a court is to interpret it according to the intent of 
them that made it. The court should as far as possible avoid that 
construction which attributes irrationality to the legislature. It 
must obviously prefer a construction which renders the statutory 
provision constitutionally valid rather than that which makes it 
void. [Ref: CST v. Mangal Sen Shyam Lal AIR 1975 SC 1106, K.P. 
Varghese v. ITO [1981] 131 ITR 597 (SC) and State of Punjab v. 
Prem Sukhdas [1977] 3 SCR 403.]  
 
11. The course of action and benchmark enumerated under 
Section 161 of the Ordinance is not contingent upon the 
compliance of pre-audit requirements mentioned under Section 
177, nor does Section 177 of the Ordinance override or overlap the 
provisions contained under Section 161 of the Ordinance as a 
precondition of audit, rather both the provisions are, in all 
fairness, seemingly independent with self-governing corollaries. 
After completion of audit under the provisions of Section 177 of the 
Ordinance, the Commissioner may, if considered necessary, amend 
the assessment under sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) of Section 
122 of the Ordinance, as the case may be, after providing an 
opportunity of being heard to the taxpayer under sub-section (9) of 
Section 122. Whereas Section 161 of the Ordinance has an 
altogether different premise wherein the Commissioner may, after 
making, or causing to be made, such enquiries as he deems 
necessary, amend or further amend an order of recovery under 
sub-section (1), if he considers that the order is erroneous in so far 
it is prejudicial to the interest of revenue with the rider that the 
order of recovery shall not be amended, unless the person referred 
to in sub-section (1) has been provided an opportunity of being 
C.Ps.1920 to 1924/2022 
-8- 
 
heard which exercise of powers has nothing to do with the general 
exercise of audit mentioned under Section 177 of the Ordinance. 
So far as Section 205 of the Ordinance is concerned, it is by and 
large related to default surcharge which obviously emanates the 
characterization of defaults in different scenarios, including where 
a person who fails to collect tax as required or fails to pay an 
amount of tax collected or deducted as required under section 160 
on or before the due date for payment is liable for default 
surcharge at a rate mentioned in the Section.   
 
12. The learned Counsel for the petitioner cited the judgment 
rendered by this Court in the case of Commissioner Inland 
Revenue Zone-I, LTU Vs. MCB Bank Limited (2021 SCMR 1325). 
The facts of this case are distinguishable to the facts and 
circumstances of the case in hand. No such question of law was 
raised that the action under Section 161 and 205 of the 
Ordinance 
cannot be initiated with complying with the 
prerequisites of Section 177 of the Ordinance. The show cause 
notice issued under Sections 161 and 205 of the Ordinance were 
challenged on altogether different grounds.  
 
13. As a result of the above discussion, we do not find any illegality 
or perversity in the impugned judgment of the learned High Court. 
The civil petitions are therefore dismissed and leave is refused.  
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Chief Justice 
 
 
       Judge 
 
       
       Judge 
 
Islamabad the 
10th August, 2022 
Khalid                  
Approved for reporting. 
