IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
(Appellate Jurisdiction) 
 
 
PRESENT:  
 
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL, CJ 
MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD ALI MAZHAR 
MS. JUSTICE MUSARRAT HILALI  
 
 
CIVIL PETITIONS NO.2270 & 2272 OF 2023  
(On appeal from the judgment dated 31.05.2023 passed 
by the High Court of Balochistan, at Quetta in 
Constitution Petitions No.353 & 352/2023) 
 
 
Jameel Qadir 
 
 
                
 
    (In C.P. No.2270/2023)  
 
Muhammad Asif Baloch                                          (In C.P. No.2272/2023) 
 
      
…Petitioners 
 
   
                                        VERSUS 
 
Government of Balochistan, Local Government, Rural Development & 
Agrovilles Department, Quetta through its Secretary and others 
     
                                                                                       
...Respondents                   
 
 
 
 
For the Petitioners: 
Mr. Sajeel Shehryar Swati, ASC 
 
 
 
 
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR 
 
 
 
 
(In C.P. No.2270/2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Shah Khawar, ASC 
 
 
 
 
(In C.P. No.2272/2023) 
 
For the private               Mr. Kamran Murtaza, Sr. ASC 
Respondents: 
         (respondents No.6 in both cases) 
 
 
 
 
For the ECP: 
 
Mr. M. Arshad, DG (Law) 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Falak Sher, Consultant 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Said Ghafoor, Deputy Director 
 
 
Date of Hearing:              27.07.2023 
 
 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
MUHAMMAD ALI MAZHAR, J:- These Civil Petitions for leave to 
appeal are directed against the judgments dated 31.05.2023 passed by 
the learned High Court of Balochistan at Quetta (“High Court”) in 
Constitution Petition Nos. 352 & 353 of 2023, whereby the orders 
dated 09.02.2023 and 01.03.2023 passed by the Election Commission 
of Pakistan (“ECP”) were set aside and the respondent No.6 in 
C.P.No.2270/2023, namely Inayatullah, and respondent No.6 in 
C.P.No.2272/2023, namely Abdul Rahim Kurd (collectively the 
“private respondents”), were declared returned candidates with the 
direction to the ECP to issue notifications for the returned candidates 
accordingly.  
C.Ps.No.2270 & 2272/2023 
-2- 
 
 
2. The transitory facts of the case are as under: 
 
i) C.P. No.2270/2023 (C.P. No.353/2023 in High Court) 
 
 
The Petitioner contested the elections for Deputy Chairman, Municipal 
Corporation, Khuzdar on 09.02.2023. The respondent No.6 (i.e. 
Inayatullah) was the opponent. During the process of counting the votes, 
the Returning Officer invalidated 24 ballots out of a total of 59 ballots for 
the reason that the mark of the voters had not been made in the actual 
place designated for the marking. Consequently, the petitioner was 
declared the returned candidate and his notification was issued on 
30.03.2023. The respondent No.6 filed an application to the ECP. The 
ECP vide order dated 01.03.2023 dismissed the petition with the 
observation that the Election Tribunal had been appointed under the law 
which may be approached. The respondent No.6, instead of approaching 
the Election Tribunal, filed a Constitution Petition to challenge the order 
of the ECP before the High Court which was allowed and the respondent 
No.6 was declared the returned candidate by the High Court. 
 
ii) C.P. No.2272/2023 (C.P. No.352/2023 in High Court) 
 
 
The petitioner and respondent No. 6 (i.e. Abdul Rahim Kurd) contested 
the Local Bodies elections for the seat of Chairman, Municipal 
Corporation, Khuzdar. The elections were held on 09.02.2023 and the 
petitioner was declared the returned candidate. According to the votes 
counted, a total of 35 ballot papers were marked in favour of the 
respondent No.6, of which 21 votes were declared invalid and 14 votes 
were declared valid. Whereas a total of 24 ballot papers were marked in 
favour of the petitioner of which 5 were declared invalid ballot papers. 
Thereafter the respondent No.6 filed an application before the ECP which 
was dismissed with the observation that the respondent No.6 may 
approach the Election Tribunal. Feeling aggrieved, the respondent No. 6 
filed a constitution petition in the High Court which was allowed and the 
respondent No.6 was declared the returned candidate by the High Court. 
 
 
 
3. The learned counsel for the petitioners argued that the impugned 
Judgment of the High Court is contrary to law. The order of the ECP 
could not be challenged through the constitutional jurisdiction of the 
High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (“Constitution”) due to a statutory bar. It 
was further contended that according to Section 37 of the Balochistan 
Local Government Act, 2010 (“2010 Act”), election disputes can only 
be resolved by the Election Tribunal, which provision has been 
enacted keeping in mind the spirit of Article 225 of the Constitution. 
The learned counsel referred to the case of Election Commission of 
Pakistan thr. Secretary v. Javaid Hashmi and others (PLD 1989 SC 
396) in which it was held that the jurisdiction of the High Court under 
Article 199 of the Constitution is barred in election matters. He further 
avowed that the Returning Officer acted completely within his power 
and without any mala fide intention. It was further contended that the 
learned High Court failed to consider that the questions related to the 
intent of voters, casting of vote and confusion, if any, are matters 
pertaining to disputed questions of fact which could only be settled by 
the Election Tribunal, but the High Court assumed the role of 
C.Ps.No.2270 & 2272/2023 
-3- 
 
Appellate Court in the writ jurisdiction instead. He further argued that 
the placement of marks on the invalidated ballots was not innocuous, 
but rather followed a particular identifiable pattern and the secrecy of 
the ballot was sacrosanct, therefore the observation of the High Court 
that voters have through affidavits appended with the petitions 
testified as to how they cast their votes is in violation of Article 226 of 
the Constitution and related provisions of the 2010 Act. It was further 
contended that the learned High Court deviated from the well-
established principle of law that where the law requires doing 
something in a particular manner, it has to be done in the same 
manner.  
 
 
4. The learned counsel for the private respondents argued that the 
confusion cropped up due to deformity of ballot papers, which were 
not printed according to Rule 63(3) of the Balochistan Local 
Government (Election) Rules, 2013 (“2013 Rules”), which explicitly 
postulates that the ballot paper should be printed according to Form-
XXIV as appended with the 2013 Rules. The private respondents first 
approached the Provincial Election Commission, Balochistan against 
the decision of the Returning Officer, and thereafter approached the 
ECP, but no action was taken and the complaint was totally ignored 
with the advice to approach the Election Tribunal, hence the 
respondents filed their Constitution Petitions in the High Court for the 
redressal of their grievance and the learned High Court rightly took 
cognizance and declared the private respondents as returned 
candidates, with the direction to the ECP to issue notifications 
accordingly. He further argued that the matter in issue could be 
resolved by the High Court and there was no need to approach the 
Election Tribunal. 
 
 
5. The Director General (Law) for the ECP supported the contention of 
the learned counsel for the petitioners and argued that after notifying 
the Election Tribunal for resolving election disputes, the learned High 
Court could not entertain the grievance of the private respondents 
under Article 199 of the Constitution; hence the constitution petitions 
were not maintainable. 
 
6. Heard the arguments. The bone of contention is whether the learned 
High Court, after the constitution of the Election Tribunal, could 
decide the election dispute between the two contestants or deem either 
one the winner in exercise of jurisdiction conferred under Article 199 
C.Ps.No.2270 & 2272/2023 
-4- 
 
of the Constitution. According to Section 37 of the 2010 Act, no 
election under the Act shall be called in question, except by an election 
petition made by a candidate for the election, whereas Section 38 
envisages that for the hearing of an election petition the ECP shall, by 
notification, appoint an officer to be an Election Tribunal for such 
areas as may be specified in the notification and, in line with Section 
39, every election petition is to be tried in such manner as may be 
prescribed. The Election Tribunal, after the conclusion of the hearing, 
may pass an order under Section 41 of the 2010 Act, either (a) 
dismissing the petition; (b) declaring the election of the returned 
candidate to be void; (c) declaring the election of the returned 
candidate to be void and the petitioner or any other contesting 
candidate to have been duly elected; or (d) declaring the election as a 
whole to be void. While sub-section (2) of Section 41 articulates that 
the decision of the Election Tribunal on an election petition shall be 
final and shall not be called into question in any court or before any 
other authority. If we look at the parallel and corresponding provision, 
that is Section 139 of the Elections Act 2017, it also provides that no 
election shall be called into question except by an election petition filed 
by a candidate for that election and under Section 140, the 
composition of the Election Tribunal is laid out for election to an 
Assembly or the Senate, or in the case of election to a local 
government.  
 
7. It is worthwhile to mention that Chapter XII of the 2013 Rules also 
relates to election disputes. According to Rule 72, no election shall be 
called into question, except by an election petition made by a 
candidate for that election, while Rule 74 relates to the contents of the 
petition in which the petitioner is required to mention the full 
particulars of any corrupt or illegal practice, or other illegal acts 
alleged to have been committed, as well as the relief claimed by the 
petitioner for (a) the declaration that the election of the returned 
candidate is void, and that the petitioner or some other person has 
been duly elected, or (b) that the election as a whole is void. In Rule 78 
a detailed procedure is provided which is to be followed by the Election 
Tribunal appointed to deal with and decide election petitions. It is 
further envisaged under Rule 80 that the Tribunal shall be deemed to 
be a Civil Court with all the powers of a Civil Court for the trial of suit 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the Qanoon-e-Shahadat 
Order 1984 is also made applicable for the trial of an election petition.  
 
C.Ps.No.2270 & 2272/2023 
-5- 
 
8. The private respondents approached the ECP with the prayer to 
declare them returned candidates, but the bottom line or end result of 
the orders passed by the ECP on the applications of the private 
respondents in both petitions which were impugned before the learned 
High Court was that the Election Tribunal has already been appointed, 
having powers to adjudicate upon the matter after framing of issues 
and recording of evidence, and if an election petition is filed the 
Election Tribunal may pass appropriate orders. The applications were 
dismissed by the ECP with the observation that if the private 
respondents so desire, they may approach the Election Tribunal to 
ventilate their grievances. 
 
 
9. The learned High Court, before adverting to the question of 
jurisdiction, not only entertained the petitions but also declared the 
private respondents as returned candidates with directions to the ECP 
to notify them. The impugned judgment of the High Court manifests 
various fact finding appraisals and, while discussing the ballot paper, 
the learned High Court observed that the ballot paper was not printed 
in the prescribed manner and also made an attempt to decipher the 
intention of voters and relied upon the annexed affidavits of the 
respective voters which were not made subject to cross examination of 
the other side. The High Court further held that the Presiding Officer 
declared the votes invalid, which was neither the fault of the 
candidate, nor of the voter, but due to the mistake committed by the 
officials of the ECP.   
 
10. The term ‘jurisdiction’ in the legal parlance means the command 
conferred to the Courts by law and Constitution to adjudicate matters 
between the parties. The jurisdiction of every Court is delineated and 
established to adhere to and pass legal orders. Transgressing or 
overriding the boundary of its jurisdiction and authority annuls and 
invalidates the judgments and orders. In order to deal with the 
different species of litigation, some Courts and Tribunals are vested 
with exclusive jurisdiction for taking cognizance of matters which 
other Courts cannot take under the rigidity or stringency of exclusive 
jurisdiction to deal with and decide the lis. No Court has the right to 
decide any lawsuit which is beyond the purview of its jurisdiction and 
want of jurisdiction conveys an action beyond the domain earmarked 
to any particular Court or Tribunal which cannot be cured, even by 
consent or acquiescence of parties. It is the prime duty of the Court to 
decide the question of jurisdiction first in case of doubts raised 
C.Ps.No.2270 & 2272/2023 
-6- 
 
regarding jurisdiction, and in any such situation it is the responsibility 
of the Court to endeavor to resolve the issue of jurisdiction at an early 
stage of the proceedings. For instance, it is an inherent sense of duty 
of the Court under Section 3 of the Limitation Act, 1908 to examine 
the plaint to make sure that the suit is not time barred even though 
the question of limitation is not set up as a defence. The rationale 
behind this intrinsic mechanism of assessment at an early stage is to 
submerge and lay to rest a time barred case without proceeding 
further. In a similar method, in case of any doubt, the Court is duty-
bound to decide the question of jurisdiction before commencing a full-
fledged trial and, if the case is found to be beyond the jurisdiction of 
that Court, the parties may be directed to seek the appropriate remedy 
before the appropriate Court or forum, rather than proceeding the 
whole case and then deciding the issue of jurisdiction; and if the 
Appellate Court holds that the Court had no jurisdiction in the matter 
then the parties will have to start from scratch. In the case of M.S. 
Ahlawat v. State of Haryana & another, (AIR 2000 SC 168), the Court 
held that to perpetuate an error is no virtue but to correct it is a 
compulsion of judicial conscience. The jurisdiction cannot be conferred 
by consent, nor can it be fettered unless there is a choice between 
more than one place in terms of jurisdiction. If the order or judgment 
is suffering from the vice of coram non judice it may be quashed and 
set aside by the Court when a special statute gives a right and also 
provides a forum for the adjudication of rights.  
 
11. The expression ‘coram non judice’ means an act done by a court 
which has no jurisdiction [Ref: Secrest v. Galloway Co., 30 N.W. 2d 
793, 797, 239 Iowa 168]. When the suit is brought in a court without 
jurisdiction it is said to be coram non judice and any judgment is null 
and void [Ref: Wharton’s Law Lexicon, 1976 reprint, p 260; K. J. 
Aiyer’s Judicial Dictionary, A Complete Law Lexicon, Thirteenth 
Edition, Thoroughly Revised by P.M. Bakshi]. When a court of general 
jurisdiction undertakes to grant a judgment in an action where it has 
not acquired jurisdiction of parties by voluntary appearance or service 
of process, the judgment is void and may be disregarded and it is 
‘coram non judice’ [Ref: City of Monroe v. Niven, 20 S.E. 2d 311, 312, 
221 N.C. 362, Words and Phrases, Permanent Edition, Volume 9A]. 
 
 
12. Here we have also noted that the learned High Court neither 
determined the question of jurisdiction, nor rendered any findings as 
to why the aggrieved person was not bound by law to avail the remedy 
C.Ps.No.2270 & 2272/2023 
-7- 
 
provided before the Election Tribunal under Section 37 of the 2010 Act 
which also gives rise to the doctrine of ‘per incuriam’, which is a Latin 
term meaning ‘through lack of care’. The decision of a Court becomes 
per incuriam when it is rendered in ignorance of a statute or a rule 
having the force of statute [Ref: Rupert Cross & J.W. Harris, Precedent 
in English Law 149 (4th ed. 1991); Black’s Law Dictionary (Ninth 
Edition)]. According to C.C.K. Allen in 'Law in the Making' (Page No. 
246), ‘per incuriam’ means 'per ignorantiam’, that is, ignorance of a 
statute or of a rule having statutory effect which would have affected 
the decision if the Court had been aware of it. In the case of 
Huddersfield Police Authority v. Watson ((1947) 2 All E.R.193) it was 
held that where a case or statute had not been brought to the Court's 
attention and the Court gave the decision in ignorance or forgetfulness 
of the existence of the case or statute, it would be a decision rendered 
in per incuriam (Also see: Morelle Ltd. v Wakeling ([1955] 2 QB 379) & 
Young v. Bristol Aeroplane Co. Ltd. (1944 KB 718 at 729 = (1944) 2 All 
E.R. 293 at 300)). 
 
13. The writ jurisdiction of the High Court cannot be worn out as a 
solitary way out or remedy for aerating all sufferings and deprivations. 
The doctrine of exhaustion of remedies stops a litigant from pursuing a 
remedy in a new court or jurisdiction until the remedy already 
provided under the law is exhausted. The underlying principle 
accentuated in this doctrine is that the litigant should not be 
encouraged to circumvent or bypass the provisions assimilated in the 
relevant statute. The extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court 
under Article 199 of the Constitution cannot be reduced to an ordinary 
jurisdiction of the High Court. It is a well settled exposition of law that 
disputed questions of facts cannot be entertained and adjudicated in 
the writ jurisdiction. The expression “adequate remedy” signifies an 
effectual, accessible, advantageous and expeditious remedy.  
 
14. The term functus officio literally denotes ‘of no further official 
authority or legal effect’ or ‘having performed his office’, and is used in 
the context of an officer who is no longer in office or has fulfilled its 
purpose. This doctrine has an extensive and pervasive application to 
both the judicial and quasi-judicial authorities and if such doctrine is 
considered insignificant, it will lead to disorder, therefore, this should 
be given credence to bring in decisiveness and certitude to legal 
proceedings. In the instant case, after notifying the returned 
candidates and appointment of Election Tribunals, the ECP being 
C.Ps.No.2270 & 2272/2023 
-8- 
 
sanguine and mindful to the provisions contained under Section 37 of 
the 2010 Act, directed the parties to approach the Election Tribunal 
where the election disputes could be resolved by the Election Tribunal 
after recording evidence as the ECP had otherwise become functus 
officio for entertaining and deciding any election dispute. If the learned 
High Court was of the view that the issue challenged before it was not 
an election dispute, then definite findings should have been recorded 
bearing in mind the bar contained under Section 37 of the 2010 Act 
and enabling provisions, but no findings were recorded with regard to 
jurisdiction.   
 
15. Vide short order of even date, the aforesaid civil petitions were 
converted into appeals and allowed in the following terms: 
 
 
“For reasons to be recorded later, these petitions are converted 
into appeals and allowed and the impugned judgment is set 
aside. The matter is remanded back to the learned High Court for 
deciding in accordance with law the question of jurisdiction of 
the High Court in an election dispute after hearing the parties 
preferably within a period of one month of the receipt of certified 
copy of this order.” 
 
 
16. Above are the reasons assigned in support of short order.  
 
 
            Chief Justice 
 
 
 
        Judge 
 
 
        Judge 
Islamabad the 
27th July, 2023 
Khalid    
Approved for Reporting.  
 
 
 
 
