IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
(Appellate Jurisdiction) 
 
 
 
Present: 
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar 
Mr. Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi 
Mr. Justice Irfan Saadat Khan  
 
 
 
 
Civil Petitions No.175-177-K of 2022 
(Against order dated 30.11.2021, passed by the 
High Court of Sindh, Circuit Court, Hyderabad 
on M.A.No.1719/2020 moved in CP No.D-217 
of 2001) 
 
 
 
 
Muhammad Ishaque 
(in CP No.175-K) 
Azira Razvi 
(in CP No.176-K) 
Ahmed Ali 
(in CP No.177-K) 
 
 
…Petitioner(s) 
Versus 
 
M/s Zeal Pak Cement Factory Ltd 
 
 
…Respondent 
For the Petitioner(s): 
  
In Person 
 
 
  
For the Respondent: 
 
 Not Represented 
 
 
  
Date of Hearing: 
 
 22.12.2023 
 
 
Judgment 
 
 
Muhammad Ali Mazhar-J. The aforesaid Civil Petitions for leave to 
appeal are directed against the Order dated 30.11.2021, whereby the 
High Court of Sindh disposed of the application (M.A.No.1719/2020) 
moved by the petitioners under Section 3 and 4 of the Contempt of 
Court Ordinance, 2003, for non-compliance of the judgment rendered 
by the divisional bench of the Sindh High Court in the Constitution 
Petition No.D-217 of 2001.  
 
2. According to the short-lived facts of the case, the petitioners and 
some other persons being aggrieved of their termination from service, 
filed grievance petitions in the Labour Court No.VI, Hyderabad, under 
Section 25-A of the Industrial Relations Ordinance, 1969 (“IRO”). The 
said grievance petitions were allowed by the Labour Court vide Order 
dated 27.10.1999, whereby the termination orders were set aside and 
the petitioners were reinstated in service with all consequential 
benefits. Being aggrieved and dissatisfied, the management of Zeal 
Pak Cement Factory filed appeals under Section 37 of the IRO and 
Civil Petitions No.175-177-K of 2022                  -2- 
 
 
 
vide judgment dated 15.01.2000, the Labour Appellate Tribunal 
allowed the appeals of the management and set aside the order of the 
Labour Court. The petitioners challenged the judgment of the Labour 
Appellate Tribunal vide Constitution Petition No.217/2001 in the 
Sindh High Court and vide judgment, dated 20.03.2009, the petition 
was allowed in the following terms: 
 
 
 
 
"In view of the above discussion the petition is 
allowed, the Judgment of the Appellate Tribunal is 
set aside and the Judgment of Labour Court is 
upheld. The petitioners are reinstated in service 
with all benefits which they were entitled at the 
date of termination of their services." 
 
 
3. On the last date of hearing, we issued notice to the respondents, 
and according to the process server’s report, Islamuddin, the Deputy 
Director/Manager of the respondent’s company, received the notice. 
Despite numerous calls, nobody appeared on their behalf, and we 
proceeded with the petitions ex-parte. 
 
4. The petitioners, in-person, argued that the High Court failed to 
realize that its own judgment was flouted. Despite a considerable 
period, the respondent failed to implement it. Neither did the 
respondent produce any record showing that any dues were ever paid 
to the petitioners for complying with the High Court’s direction, nor 
did the High Court ask the management to produce such records to 
confirm the implementation of the judgment.  
 
 
5. Heard the arguments. Seemingly, the directions issued by the High 
Court for reinstatement in service with all benefits, which they were 
entitled to at the date of termination of their services, were not 
complied with. Therefore, the petitioners filed an application in the 
High Court for initiating contempt proceedings for the non-compliance 
of  judgment. However, the High Court declined to initiate contempt 
proceedings based on the statement of the alleged contemnors that 
substantial compliance of the judgment had been made. The 
impugned order does not reflect whether any verified statement of 
accounts was filed in the High Court by the alleged contemnors to 
demonstrate compliance and payments, if any, made to the 
petitioners. Additionally, no due diligence was made by the High Court 
to ensure compliance with its own judgments.  
 
Civil Petitions No.175-177-K of 2022                  -3- 
 
 
 
6. The petitioners have also attached certain order sheets passed by 
different divisional benches of the High Court in the same 
proceedings. The order dated 25.03.2021, shows that the High Court 
directed the Additional Registrar of the High Court to attach the 
accounts of Zeal Pak Cement Factory to the tune of sums payable to 
the petitioners, whereas another order, dated 22.4.2021, depicts that 
as a last opportunity, one-month time was granted to the alleged 
contemnors to ensure the payment of all dues to the petitioners. 
Another order dated 26.05.2021 demonstrates that Mr. Islamuddin, 
Deputy Director of the respondent company, undertook to make 
payment of wages and sought time and therefore, as a last and final 
chance, 15 days were granted for compliance, with the rider that in 
case of noncompliance, the High Court would have the option to seize 
the assets of the company. At the same time, the petitioners were also 
directed to file their individual statements, along with their claims, 
within 5 days.  The order, dated 13.10.2021, shows that some more 
time was granted for ensuring payment, and in case of failure, the 
court warned that coercive steps would be taken in view of the order 
dated 26.05.2021. Thereafter, the matter was fixed on 23.11.2021, 
whereby directions were issued to the counsel for the petitioners to 
provide the details of back benefits as admissible to the petitioners. 
However, when the matter was fixed on 30.11.2021, just five days 
later, despite passing various harsh and deterrent orders on the 
aforesaid dates for ensuring compliance and implementation of the 
judgment, the contempt application was disposed of precipitously and 
inconsiderately. The sole observation was that substantial compliance 
has been made. We have also observed that in order to comply with 
the directions given by the Court, the learned counsel of the 
petitioners filed a statement on 10.11.2021 along with the copies of 
claims of outstanding dues. However, it is not mentioned whether 
these claims, which were filed in compliance of the Court order, were 
ever asked to be verified by the management, or any effort was made 
to ensure compliance with the various orders of the court passed from 
time to time for implementation of the main judgment dated 
20.03.2009. The matter remained pending for a considerable period of 
time without ensuring compliance of the High Court judgment. What 
substantial compliance was allegedly made should have been reflected 
in the order to determine whether due compliance has been achieved 
or not. So, in all fairness, it was not enough to dispose of the 
Civil Petitions No.175-177-K of 2022                  -4- 
 
 
 
contempt application on the ground that if the petitioners have any 
substantial claim against the respondent, they are at liberty to seek a 
remedy, if any, under the law, which means that the judgment passed 
by this Court on 20.03.2009 has been made virtually ineffectual and 
otiose.  
 
7. The gist of the previously passed orders by different benches, which 
we have mentioned in the preceding paragraph, demonstrates that the 
representative of the management undertook to ensure the payment of 
dues. On various occasions, time was enlarged for making payments. 
However, surprisingly, the management took a summersault and 
pleaded that the petitioners were paid all their dues at the time of 
termination on 13.03.1996 and the remaining salary of the petitioners 
for 13 days, which was due at the time of termination, was also paid 
to them; that one petitioner had passed away, therefore, his gratuity 
and all benefits were paid to his widow Mst. Azra Razvi and the 
remaining petitioners are regularly getting their salaries and benefits, 
but we have not found any such record either reflecting from the 
impugned order or in our paper book. 
 
 
8. Under Article 204 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 (“Constitution”), both the Supreme Court and a High 
Court have powers to punish any person who (a) abuses, interferes 
with or obstructs the process of the Court in any way or disobeys any 
order of the Court; (b) scandalizes the Court or otherwise does 
anything which tends to bring the Court or a Judge of the Court into 
hatred, ridicule or contempt; (c) does anything which tends to 
prejudice the determination of a matter pending before the Court; or 
(d) does any other thing which, by law, constitutes contempt of the 
Court. The powers conferred by this Article may be regulated by law 
and, subject to law, by rules made by the Court. According to the 
Contempt of Court Ordinance, 2003 (“Ordinance”), Section 2 of the 
Ordinance  (Definitions Clause) delineates the nature and gravity of 
contempt of Court such as (a)  “civil contempt”, which means the 
wilful flouting or disregard of (i) an order, whether interim or final, a 
judgment or decree of a Court; (ii)  a writ or order issued by a Court in 
the exercise of its Constitutional Jurisdiction; (iii)  an undertaking 
given to, and recorded by, a Court; (iv) the process of a Court; 
(b) “criminal contempt”, which means the doing of any act with intent 
to, or having the effect of, obstructing the administration of justice; 
Civil Petitions No.175-177-K of 2022                  -5- 
 
 
 
(c) “judicial contempt”, which means the scandalization of a Court and 
includes personalized criticism of a Judge while holding office. 
Whereas, Section 3 of the Ordinance provides that whoever disobeys 
or disregards any order, direction or process of a Court, which he is 
legally bound to obey; or commits a wilful breach of a valid 
undertaking given to a Court; or does anything which is intended to or 
tends to bring the authority of a Court or the administration of law 
into disrespect or disrepute, or to interfere with or obstruct or 
interrupt or prejudice the process of law or the due course of any 
judicial proceedings, or to lower the authority of a Court or scandalize 
a Judge in relation to his office, or to disturb the order or decorum of 
a Court, is said to commit “contempt of Court”. The contempt is of 
three types, namely, the “civil contempt”, “criminal contempt” and 
“judicial contempt”. Section 5 of the Ordinance deals with punishment 
and provides that any person who commits contempt of Court shall be 
punished with imprisonment which may extend to six months’ simple 
imprisonment, or with fine which may extend to one hundred 
thousand rupees, or with both. Whereas in Sub-section (3), it is 
clearly provided that in the case of contempt having been committed, 
or alleged to have been committed, by a company, the responsibility 
therefore shall extend to the persons in the company, directly or 
indirectly, responsible for the same, who shall also be liable to be 
punished accordingly. 
 
9. A noteworthy and acclaimed characteristic of the canons of 
jurisdiction should not have been relegated, which is that neither 
should the Court embark on the jurisdiction not vested in it by law, 
nor should it abdicate or renounce a jurisdiction so vested in it by 
law. If the judgment of High Court is not implemented in its letter and 
spirit, it is evident that the High Court ought to have taken all 
necessary steps for compliance of its judgment or order to alleviate the 
suffering of the beneficiary, rather than divesting or repudiating its 
jurisdiction as vested under Article 204 of the Constitution read with 
the provisions of the Ordinance. Although the impugned order does 
not reflect any compliance on record, it asserts that “substantial 
compliance” has been made without requiring any proof. It is not clear 
whether the petitioners when filed their claims in compliance of the 
orders passed by the High Court, the respondent filed any reply for 
challenging or disputing the figure or amount of claim or made any 
Civil Petitions No.175-177-K of 2022                  -6- 
 
 
 
efforts to account for or set off the amount if already paid to the 
petitioners in compliance of the judgment of the High Court. All these 
crucial rudiments are missing. The Court has to assess the contempt 
and its gravity and may also purge it if an unqualified apology is 
tendered by the contemnor. However, there is no concept or parameter 
to relieve or emancipate the contemnors on the notion that 
substantial compliance has been made, which has not been 
demonstrated in this case. On the contrary, the High Court must have 
ensured the due compliance of its own judgment rather than 
instructing the petitioners to seek an appropriate remedy for 
compliance or implementation of judgment. The Court has to evaluate 
the compliance of its judgment in its entirety and not the ratio or 
percentage of compliance. The denial of exercising jurisdiction 
proactively in the contempt proceedings for revitalising and assuring 
the compliance of judgment not only rendered the main judgment 
worthless and inconsequential, but for all practical purposes, also 
undermined the writ of the Court and water down the efficacy of the 
orders passed by different benches in the same proceedings on 
25.03.2021, 22.04.2021, 26.05.2021, 13.10.2021 and 23.11.2021 for 
ensuring the compliance.  
 
10. In view of the above, these petitions are converted into an appeal 
and allowed. The impugned Order of the High Court is set aside and 
the matter is remanded back to the High Court for deciding the CMA 
No.1719 of 2010 afresh and for examining whether the judgment has 
been implemented as per the directions issued by the High Court or 
not. The matter shall be decided after issuing notice and providing 
ample opportunity of hearing to the parties.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
Karachi  
22.12.2023 
Approved for reporting 
 
         Judge 
 
