IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
(Appellate Jurisdiction) 
 
 
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE JAMAL KHAN MANDOKHAIL 
MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD ALI MAZHAR  
 
 
CIVIL PETITION NO. 460 OF 2022  
(On 
appeal 
from 
the 
Order 
dated 
05.01.2022 passed by the Punjab Service 
Tribunal, 
Lahore 
in 
Appeal 
No. 
2547/2020) 
 
 
 
Rafaqat Ali                                                                    …Petitioner 
 
   
                                        VERSUS 
 
Chief Secretary, Government of the Punjab, Punjab, Lahore and others 
                                                                                   …..Respondents                    
 
 
 
 
For the Petitioner:  
In-Person 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the Respondents: 
Barrister Muhammad Mumtaz Ali,  
Additional Advocate General, Punjab 
 
 
 
 
Date of Hearing:              25.10.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
JUDGMENT 
 
 
MUHAMMAD ALI MAZHAR, J:- This Civil Petition for leave to appeal 
is directed against the Order dated 05.01.2022 passed by the learned 
Punjab Service Tribunal, Lahore (“Tribunal”) in Appeal No. 2547 of 
2020 whereby the appeal filed by the petitioner was dismissed. 
 
2. The crux of the matter is that the petitioner was proceeded on the 
charge of an alleged shameful/unethical act of harassing male 
students. After an inquiry had been conducted, and recommendations 
made, the Chief Operating Officer of the Technical Education & 
Vocational Training Authority (“TEVTA”) imposed the penalty of 
Compulsory Retirement from service vide Order dated 18.02.2020. The 
petitioner filed a Departmental Appeal before the Chairman, TEVTA on 
26.02.2020 which remained pending. During the intervening period, 
the petitioner also filed a representation before the Chief Secretary, 
Government of Punjab which remained undecided and according to 
him, in the same period of time, there was also a lockdown due to 
COVID-19 pandemic. Though the petitioner approached the learned 
C.P.No.460/2022 
-2- 
 
Tribunal on 16.06.2020, it is further reflected from the record that 
during the pendency of appeal before the Tribunal, the Chairman 
TEVTA decided the pending departmental appeal of the petitioner vide 
order dated 30.11.2020. The learned Tribunal dismissed the service 
appeal of the petitioner predominantly on the ground of limitation and 
observed in the impugned order that, according to Section 19 (2) of the 
Punjab Employees Efficiency, Discipline and Accountability Act, 2006 
(“PEEDA Act”) the petitioner was required to approach the Tribunal 
between 26.04.2020 and 26.05.2020, but he filed the appeal in the 
Tribunal on 16.06.2020 with a delay of 20 days, hence appeal filed by 
the petitioner was dismissed being barred by time.  
 
3. The petitioner (in-person) argued that the learned Tribunal had 
dismissed the appeal without adverting to the relevant facts of the 
case. The petitioner contended that he was initially appointed in the 
Education Department, Government of Punjab. Later on he was 
transferred on deputation under the Punjab TEVTA Act, 2010 (“TEVTA 
Act”), and, as envisaged under Section 26 of the TEVTA Act, the status 
of the petitioner was a Civil Servant, therefore the Chief Secretary, 
Government of Punjab was competent to decide the departmental 
appeal, however the learned Tribunal failed to consider the actual 
appellate forum. He also attributed the delay to the lockdown imposed 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic which was not considered by the 
learned Tribunal while holding the appeal time barred. He then argued 
that the inquiry proceedings were not conducted in accordance with 
the law as no ample right of defence was accorded to the petitioner 
and though he was delivered a questionnaire during the inquiry, no 
opportunity was provided to cross-examine the witnesses deposed 
against him which was against the mandate of Article 10A of the 
Constitution 
of 
the 
Islamic 
Republic 
of 
Pakistan, 
1973 
(“Constitution”).  
 
4. The learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab (“Addl. AG”), 
during the course of arguments, admitted that the petitioner was a 
civil servant who was transferred to the Punjab TEVTA. It was further 
contended that the petitioner was initially appointed as a Junior 
Instructor (BS-14) vide office order dated 02.07.1999, whereas the 
TEVTA was established by virtue of the Punjab TEVTA Ordinance, 
1999 which was repealed when the Punjab TEVTA Act, 2010 was 
C.P.No.460/2022 
-3- 
 
promulgated. He further argued that Section 26 of the TEVTA Act 
protects the status of the petitioner as a civil servant. It was further 
contended that in the case in hand the Chief Operating Officer was the 
Appointing Authority under the PEEDA Act; therefore he was 
authorized to pass any order in relation to the service matter of the 
TEVTA employees and according to Section 16 of the said Act, the 
appeal could have been preferred before the Appellate Authority i.e. 
the Chairman. It was further averred that compliant with Section 2(b) 
of the PEEDA Act, the authority next above the competent authority 
was authorized to hear an appeal. So far as the right of appeal 
provided under Section 20 of the TEVTA Act is concerned, the learned 
Addl. AG argued that it pertains to the order passed by the Authority, 
against which an appeal lies to the government, which, according to 
him, is not applicable to the petitioner’s case.  
 
5. Heard the arguments. It is clearly manifesting from the record that 
while deciding the appeal, the learned Tribunal predominantly 
discussed the issue of limitation without adverting to the crucial 
question regarding the relevant departmental authority before which 
the departmental appeal could have been preferred before approaching 
the Tribunal, or whether the delay in approaching the Tribunal was 
due to the reckless conduct of the petitioner or on account of the 
lockdown in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. According to the 
petitioner, the order of compulsory retirement dated 18.02.2020 was 
received by him on 21.02.2020. He filed a departmental appeal before 
the Chairman TEVTA on 26.02.2020, however after a long delay, the 
Chairman decided the appeal of the petitioner vide order dated 
30.11.2020 (page 134 of the main paper book). The order of the alleged 
appellate authority accepted the recommendations of the inquiry 
officer and rejected the appeal after the lapse of the statutory period 
provided for deciding the appeal under the law without any 
independent reasons and application of mind, however, to justify the 
delay, the order reflects that due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the 
appeal could not be heard in time. According to the petitioner, when 
the Chief Secretary failed to decide the departmental appeal, he filed 
the appeal before the Tribunal on 15.06.2020 through his counsel. 
The foremost and dominant point at issue is germane to the 
determination of the competent authority, which may decide the 
C.P.No.460/2022 
-4- 
 
appeal. It is also an admitted position of the learned Add. AG that the 
petitioner is a civil servant under the niceties of Section 26 of the 
TEVTA Act but, in addition thereto, he argued that against the order of 
compulsory retirement, the appellate authority is the Chairman 
TEVTA. The nitty-gritties of Section 26 of the TEVTA Act, accentuate 
the repeal of the Punjab TEVTA Ordinance, 1999, and clause (d) of 
sub-section (2) envisions that the employees of the government 
transferred to the Punjab TEVTA under the repealed ordinance shall 
continue to be the employees of the government unless absorbed in 
the service of the authority.  The petitioner thought to be a civil 
servant also filed an appeal before the Chief Secretary in accordance 
with the exactitudes of Section 20 of the TEVTA Act, which provides 
that a person aggrieved by an order of the authority may, within 30 
days of the communication of the order, file an appeal to the 
government whose decision shall be final. We have also noted that 
other than Section 20, no other provision is available in the TEVTA Act 
for filing an appeal by an aggrieved employee, though, the learned 
Addl. AG argued that the right of appeal should have been availed 
under Section 16 of the PEEDA Act whereby the departmental appeal 
could have been filed by the petitioner directly to the Appellate 
Authority. The petitioner submits that though he preferred an appeal 
before the Chairman, but being a civil servant, he should have 
preferred the appeal to the Chief Secretary, Government of Punjab and 
since there was a lack of clarity, therefore, after preferring the 
departmental appeal to the Chairman, he also sent his departmental 
appeal to the Chief Secretary, which, according to him, was the 
competent authority to deal with cases of civil servants.  
 
6. All the aforesaid important and crucial questions have not been 
discussed by the learned Tribunal, being the ultimate Appellate forum, 
regarding whether the departmental appeal was maintainable before 
the Chief Secretary or whether the departmental appeal filed before the 
Chairman was an appropriate remedy. Moreover, the appellate order 
passed by the Chairman also articulates that on presentation of 
departmental appeal, the petitioner, vide letter dated 16.03.2020 was 
called upon to attend for personal hearing on 18.03.2020 which was 
not afforded on account of COVID-19 pandemic and next date of 
hearing was 27.8.2020 and finally the personal hearing was afforded 
C.P.No.460/2022 
-5- 
 
to the petitioner on 01.09.2020 and appeal was rejected vide order 
dated 30.11.2020.  
 
7. According to Section 19 of the PEEDA Act, an employee, other than 
the employee mentioned in Section 2 (h) (i), aggrieved by a final order 
passed under Section 16 or 17 may, within 30 days from the date of 
communication of the order, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal 
established under the Punjab Service Tribunals Act, 1974 (IX of 1974). 
However, it is further provided under Sub-section (2) that if the 
Appellate Authority or the Chief Minister does not pass any final order 
on the departmental appeal or the review petition filed under Section 
16 within a period of 60 days from the date of filing of the 
departmental appeal or the review petition, the aggrieved employee, 
not being the employee mentioned in section 2 (h) (i), may prefer an 
appeal to the Punjab Service Tribunal within 90 days of the filing of 
the departmental appeal or review petition. The term jurisdiction has 
multifarious concepts of jurisprudence which means the study of law 
and the principles on which laws are based. The service tribunals have 
exclusive jurisdiction in matters falling within the terms and 
conditions of civil servant but an order affecting the terms and 
conditions of service is sine qua non for entreating the jurisdiction of 
the Service Tribunal which has been vested in limited jurisdiction to 
deal with and decide matters relating to the terms and conditions of 
service of a civil servant. The service appeal before the service tribunal 
is in essence the continuation of proceedings of the departmental 
order rendered in departmental appeal which is an administrative 
remedy and channel for alleviating the grievance of civil servant before 
invoking the jurisdiction of the service tribunal.  
 
 
8. The underlying principle of appellate jurisdiction is to ensure 
checks and balances by means of reevaluation and reexamination of 
the judgment and orders passed by the lower fora in order to 
scrutinize whether any error has been committed on the facts and law 
and, while reversing the judgment of court below, record the reasons 
for justifying the appellate decision. The wisdom of setting up a Service 
Tribunal under Article 212 of the Constitution is to deal with and 
decide matters relating to the terms and conditions of service of Civil 
Servants. Under Section 5 (2) of the Service Tribunals Act 1973, the 
C.P.No.460/2022 
-6- 
 
Tribunal for the purposes of deciding any appeal, is deemed to be a 
Civil Court and have the same powers as are vested in such court. As 
a forum of exclusive jurisdiction, the Constitutional mandate as well 
as the provisions of the Service Tribunals Act articulate and command 
that the complete and substantial justice must be done between the 
parties with a judicious denouement of the case, therefore, before 
nonsuiting the petitioner on the ground of limitation, the fundamental 
question with regard to the competent authority should have been 
determined by the learned Tribunal vis-à-vis the claim and assertion of 
the petitioner whether being a civil servant, he rightly approached the 
Chief Secretary and, if he was not competent, then which was the 
competent authority for deciding departmental appeal under the 
TEVTA Act, including another crucial aspect of lockdown which had 
direct nexus with the plea of limitation in view of the notification, if 
any, issued from time to time by the Service Tribunal, relaxing the 
period of limitation during the lockdown period or following any other 
notification issued by the Federal Government or Government of 
Punjab and/or the learned Lahore High Court during the COVID-19 
pandemic and then the appeal should have been decided where 
obviously the question of limitation could also be adverted to by the 
learned Service Tribunal whether any relaxation for freezing or 
immobilizing the period of limitation for filing appeal was available to 
the petitioner during interacted period attributable to lockdown as a 
result of COVID-19 or not?  
  
9.  In the wake of the above discussion, the Civil Petition is converted 
into an appeal and is allowed. The impugned order of the learned 
Tribunal is set aside and the matter is remanded to decide the appeal 
afresh, preferably within a period of 60 days.  
 
       
 
 
Judge 
 
 
Judge 
Announced in open Court 
On 21.11.2023 at Islamabad      Judge__________ 
Khalid    
Approved for reporting 
C.P.No.460/2022 
-7- 
 
 
 
 
