IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
(ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)

PRESENT:

MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL, HCJ
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN

MR. JUSTICE MUNIB AKHTAR

CONSTITION PETITION NO. 22 OF 2022
(Against the ruling of Deputy Speaker Punjab
Assembly dated 22.07.2022)

Ch. Parvez Elahi ..-Petitioner
VERSUS

The Deputy Speaker Provincial Assembly of Punjab, Lahore, etc.
... Respondents

For the petitioner(s): Syed Ali Zafar, ASC
Mr. Imtiaz Rashid Siddiqui, ASC
Mr. Amir Saeed Rawn, ASC
Mr. Safdar Shaheen Peerzada, ASC
Mr. Ahmad Awais, ASC
Syed Mushtaq Ahmad Zaidi, AOR
Mr. Azhar Siddique, ASC
Rai Shahid Saleem, ASC

For respondent No.1: Mr. Irfan Qadir, ASC
For respondent No.2: Mr. Mansoor Usman, ASC
Mr. Khalid Ishaq, ASC
For respondent No.3: Mr. Shahzad Shaukat, AG Punjab
Ch. M. Jawwad Yagoob, Addl. A.G.
Mr. Kamran Ali Afzal, Chief Secretary
Mr. Nasir Ali Chohan, Addl. A.G. Punjab

Ch. Amir Rehman, Addl, Att. General
Mr. Tahir Mehmood Ahmad Khokhar,
DAG along with Malik Muhammad
Abbas Farooq, Adv.

On notice:

Date of hearing: 23.07.2022 at 02:30 P.M.
Const. P,No, 22 of 2022

ORDER
Our hearing today in this matter was held in two sessions.
In the first session, we issucd notices to the respondents. The
operative part of that order is reproduced below:-
"3. Learned Counsel for the Petitioner has read to us from
Article 63-A (1)(b) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan, 1973 to submit that the direction to members is to be
issued by the parliamentary party to which they, in this case
MPAs, belong. lle has read from para 3 of our judgment dated
17.05.2022 to submit that the direction has to, and can only, be
given by the parliamentary party itself, On the other hand, the
impugned Deputy Speaker’s ruling dated 22.07.2022, accepts
that the head of the political party can issue such a direction, The
question therefore is whether our judgment takes the view that
appears to be expressed in the Deputy Speaker’s ruling dated
22.07.2022. We require his assistance in the matter. Accordingly,
notice is issued to him. Notice shall also be issued to
Respondents No.2 & 3 as questions of constitutional import,
mainly in relating to Article 63-A(1)(b) read with our judgment
dated 17.05.2022, arise for determination. We would also issue

notice under Order XXVII, CPC to the Attorney General for
Pakistan and the Advocate General, Punjab.”

2. In answer to our notices all three respondents namely, the
Deputy Speaker Provincial Assembly, Mr. Hamza Shahbaz and the
Province of Punjab are represented through their respective counsel
and the Advocate General, Punjab along with Chief Secretary, Punjab.
We invited the Advocate Gencral to answer our query as to which part
of our short judgment dated 17.05.2022 passed in Presidential
Reference No.1 of 2022 is relied on by the Deputy Speaker for his
impugned Ruling dated 22.07.2022 to treat the direction by the Party
Head, namely, Chaudhary Shujaat Hussain to abstain for the election
of Chief Minister to be binding on the Members of the Parliamentary
Party who had voted in favour of Chaudhary Parvez Elahi in the
election for the Chief Minister Punjab held on 22.07.2022. In this
regard attention of the Iearned Advocate General and the counsel for
the other respondents was drawn to paragraph-3 of our short

judgment dated 17.05.2022 which is to the following effect:-
Const. P.No, 22 of 2022

"3. Turning to the secand question and keeping in mind the
answer to the first, it is our view that the vote of any member
(including a deemed member) of a Parliamentary Party in a
House that is cust contrary to any direction issued hy the latter in
terms of para (b) of clause (1) of Article 63A cannot he counted
and must be disregarded, and this is so regardles: of whether

the Party Head, subsequent to such vote, proceeds ta tabe, or

refrains from taking action that would result in a declaration of

defection. The second question referred to this Court stand
answered in the foregoing terms.”

3. In addition, we invited thcir attention to the provisions of
the Article 63A (1)(b) of the Constitution which provides as follows:

63A (1)

(b) votes or abstains from voting in the House contrary to any
direction issued by the Parliamentary Party to which he
belongs, in relation to-

(i) election of the Prime Minister or the Chief Minister; or

(ii) a vote of confidence or a vote of no-confidence; ar

(iii) a Money Bill or a Constitution (Amendment) Bill:
4. To our mind both the Constitutional provisions and our
interpretation thereof in paragraph-3 of the short judgment,
reproduced above, are clear in treating the direction of the
Parliamentary Party to be binding on members of the Parliamentary
Party in the case where vote is to be cast, inter alia, for election to the
office of Chief Minister. On the other hand, as noted above, the
impugned Deputy Speaker Ruling dated 22.07.2022 treats the
direction by the Party Head to be binding on the legislators in the case
of an election of Chief Minister in terms of Article 63A of the
Constitution.
5. Learned Advocate General did not respond to our query
but referred us to certain appeals filed against the decision of the
Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) dated 20.05.2022 by which
statedly certain MPAs in the Punjab Provincial Assembly belonging to

PTI had been held to have violated the direction of the Party Head in
Const. P.No, 22 of 2022

the election of the Chicf Minister and were declared as defectors, their
voles were not counted, they ceased to be members of the House and
their scats became vacant as provided in Article 63A(4) of the
Constitution. He requests that the present petition may be heard along
with the appeals filed in the Supreme Court against the said decision
of the ECP.

6. Learned counscl for the Deputy Speaker was also unable
to defend the impugned Ruling in terms of Article 63A (1)(b) of the
Constitution and our short judgment dated 17.05.2022. However, he
stated that he had been engaged only two hours ago and needed
further instructions to prepare his bricf, He prayed that time may be
granted to file a concise statement. The learned counsel for the Chief
Minister did not come forward to answer the query either,

7. The learned counscl for the petitioners submits that the
matter is urgent in nature because the Constitutional governance of
the Province is under dispute and, therefore, the matter may be taken
up tomorrow i.c. Sunday for hearing.

8. After hearing the learncd counsel for the parties we find
that the respondents need time to articulate their response further.
However, we notc that at present they are unable to justify the
impugned Ruling of the Deputy Speaker before us. As a result the
status of the Chief Minister clect/respondent No.2 is under a cloud. In
such a situation he cannot be deemed to be invested with the status of
a duly elected Chicf Minister under the Constitution. This is much like
the situation in the carlicr round of litigation between the parties
culminating in our order dated 01.07.2022. By that order he
acknowledged that the Constitution does not envisage the governance

of Province without a Chicf Minister and a Cabinet. Accordingly, our
Const. P.No. 22 of 2022

order dated 01.07.2022 was passed with consent of the parties
whereby respondent No.2 was designated as a Trustee holding the
office of Chief Minister with his powers being curtailed in a manner
that he could not advance the political interest of his party or his
supporters through his administrative actions amongst others by
conferring benefits, privileges and protection including by making
appointments and taking police action.

9. We proposcd to the learned counsel for the parties that in
the circumstances of the case the Court was inclined to allow the
respondent No.2 to perform the dutics and functions of his office under
the afore-noted constraints. In this respect neither the Advocate
Gencral nor the other counsel representing the respondents raised any
objections. In fact, it was evident that they understood and appreciated

the nature of the controversy and the need for appropriate measures to

reflect the gravity of the dispute on the basis of the alleged

constitutional violation and the need for harmony, peace and order to

prevail in the governance of the Province. We have been assured that

till the decision of this matter respondent No.2 and his cabinet shall

exercise the powers and functions of their offices strictly in a fiduciary

capacity as envisaged by the Constitution and the law and that such

commitment to act as Trustees is meant to fulfil the duty of care

towards people of Punjab so that they are not deprived of due

representation and governance and to avoid any Constitutional

vacuum or complication.

10. As a result, we grant the respondents time to file their

concise statements and documents, if any, from the record of the

Provincial Assembly in respect of the impugned Ruling of the Deputy

Speaker dated 22.07.2022 by 11:00 A.M. on 25.07.2022 for hearing of
Const. P.No. 22 of 2022 6
—eeereors )

the petition at 01:00 P.M. on that date. Learned counsel for the Deputy
Speaker shall ensure that the relevant record summoned by the Court
in particular the letter by the Party Head of PML-Q on the basis of

which the impugned Ruling has been passed shall be filed on record in

this petition.

Lahore, the
23% July of 2022
A. Khokhar

Scanned with CamScanner
