IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
 (ORIGINAL JURISDICTION) 
 
PRESENT: 
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL, HCJ 
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN 
MR. JUSTICE MUNIB AKHTAR  
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.22 OF 2022  
AGAINST THE RULING OF DEPUTY SPEAKER, PUNJAB ASSEMBLY 
DATED 22.07.2022  
 
Chaudhry Parvez Elahi 
 
 
 
 
Petitioner(s) 
 
 
 
 
Versus 
Deputy Speaker, Provincial Assembly of Punjab, 
Lahore and others 
 
 
 
  
 
Respondent(s) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the petitioner(s): 
Mr. Ali Zafar, ASC 
 
Mr. Imtiaz Rashid Siddiqui, ASC 
 
Mr. Aamir Saeed Rana, ASC 
 
Mr. M. Safdar Shaheen Pirzada, ASC 
 
Dr. Babar Awan, ASC 
 
Ch. Faisal Fareed, ASC 
 
Mr. Ahmed Owais, ASC 
 
Mr. Azhar Siddiqui, ASC (via video link at Lahore) 
 
Syed M. Ali Bukhari, ASC  
 
Assisted by 
 
Mr. Sabeel Tariq, Advocate 
 
Mr. Hamza Sheikh, Advocate  
 
Mr. Abdullah Babar, Advocate 
 
Mr. Fayaz Kandwal, Advocate 
 
 
For Respondent No.1: 
Mr. Irfan Qadir, ASC 
 
For Respondent No.2: 
Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, ASC 
 
Mr. Khalid Ishaq, ASC 
 
For Punjab Govt: 
Mr. Qasim Ali Chohan, Addl.AG. 
 
Ch. M. Jawad Yaqub, Addl.AG  
(via video link from Lahore) 
 
For the Federation: 
Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl.AGP 
 
Mr. Sohail Mehmood, Addl.AGP 
 
Assisted by 
 
Mr. Usama Rauf, Advocate 
 
Malik Abbas Farooq, Advocate  
 
For PPPP: 
Mr. Farooq H. Naek, Sr.ASC 
 
Syed Rafaqat H. Shah, AOR 
 
Assisted by 
 
Mr. Sheraz Shaukat Rajpar, Advocate  
 
Constitutional Petition No.22 of 2022. 
2 
 
For PML-Q President: 
Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed, ASC 
 
Mr. Mohsin Qadir Shahwani, ASC   
 
Date of Hearing: 
26.07.2022  
 
  
 O R D E R  
 
 
 
UMAR ATA BANDIAL, CJ. A Full Bench of the 
learned High Court vide judgment dated 30.06.2022 partly 
allowed certain writ petitions, inter alia, directing that the 
Session of the Punjab Assembly be resumed on 01.07.2022 
(Friday) at 4:00 pm to hold poll in terms of Article 130 (4) of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of the Pakistan, 1973 
(“Constitution”). The said election was the runoff in terms of 
the proviso to Article 130(4) ibid for the post of Chief Minister, 
Punjab to be held between the respondent No.2, Hamza 
Shahbaz Sharif PML(N) and the petitioner PML(Q). A petition 
filed before this Court against the said order dated 30.06.2022 
was disposed of on 01.07.2022 by a consent order. It was 
agreed by and between the petitioner and the respondent No.2 
as well as the coalition partner of the petitioner (PTI) that the 
runoff election would be held on 22.07.2022 after the bye-
elections on the 20 general seats in the Punjab Assembly 
vacated by the PTI members whom the ECP had declared as 
defectors. Both the petitioner and the respondent No.2 agreed to 
the continued functioning of the respondent No.2 as the Chief 
Minister of the Province in a fiduciary capacity until holding of 
the runoff election. It was further agreed that the election would 
be held under the charge and supervision of the Election Act 
and the Code of Conduct of the ECP. It was further directed 
Constitutional Petition No.22 of 2022. 
3 
 
that the election process would be completed in accordance with 
the schedule announced by the ECP which would issue 
notification of the final result accordingly. 
2. 
 
At the runoff election held on 22.07.2022 the 
petitioner secured 186 votes whilst the respondent No.2 got 179 
votes which is recorded in the impugned ruling of the Deputy 
Speaker dated 22.07.2022. However, the Deputy Speaker 
excluded 10 votes in favour of the petitioner from count as a 
result of which he announced the winning candidate for the slot 
of Chief Minister to the respondent No.2. The votes were 
excluded on the basis that 10 members of the PML(Q) had failed 
to follow the direction under Article 63A(1)(b) of the Constitution 
given by the party head to the members of the Parliamentary 
Party of PML(Q).  
3. 
 
As a result the winning candidate who had received 
186 votes lost the election by 03 votes. The Deputy Speaker’s 
ruling was challenged before this Court on 23.07.2022. After 
the preliminary hearing the matter has been heard at Principal 
seat on 25.07.2022 and on 26.07.2022.  
4. 
 
We have arrived at the conclusions that follow after 
hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned 
counsel for the respondents No. 1 to 3 at Islamabad. It may be 
mentioned that the learned counsel for the respondents raised 
an objection to the hearing of the matter by a three Member 
Bench of this Court and sought the referral thereof to the Full 
Court. However, while explaining the grounds for making this 
Constitutional Petition No.22 of 2022. 
4 
 
request the learned counsel for the respondents No.1 and 2 also 
laid out their case on the merits of the dispute which essentially 
concerns a question of law touching the formation of the 
Provincial Government allegedly in violation of the provisions of 
the Constitution, in particular, Article 63A read with Article 
130(4) thereof.  
5. 
 
Although elaborate submissions were made in terms 
as above yesterday i.e. 25.07.2022, requests were made by the 
learned counsel for the respondents/interveners for further time 
to make additional submissions, if any, and seek instructions. 
We accordingly adjourned the matter for today i.e. 26.07.2022 
at 11:30 am to give the learned counsel for the respondents/ 
interveners a further opportunity to add to their submissions on 
the merits of the case if deemed appropriate by them. However, 
when the matter was taken up at 11:30 am, the learned counsel 
for the respondents as well as interveners one by one stepped 
forward and informed the Court that their respective clients had 
instructed them not to participate further in the proceedings in 
this case. However, in the first session which continued for 
about one hour and forty-five minutes, they did not withdraw 
from the Court room and observed further proceedings in the 
matter during which we heard further arguments of the learned 
counsel for the petitioner specially in relation to submissions 
that had been made by the learned counsel for the 
respondent/interveners on the previous date, and the reliance 
placed by them on the following judgments of this Court: 
Constitutional Petition No.22 of 2022. 
5 
 
District Bar Association, Rawalpindi vs.  Federation of 
Pakistan (PLD 2015 SC 401), Sardar Sher Bahadar Khan vs. 
Election Commission of Pakistan (PLD 2018 SC 97) and 
Zulfiqar Ahmed Bhutta vs. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2018 
SC 370). 
6. 
 
While we will deal with these decisions in our 
detailed reasons in support of this short order, it would not be 
out of place to say something here with regard to the first of the 
aforementioned judgments. 
7. 
 
Much emphasis has been laid upon the judgment of 
the Full Court delivered in the case of District Bar Association 
(supra) both on the merits and as a ground for placing the 
present petition for hearing before the Full Court. The said 
judgment adjudicated, as presently relevant, the vires of the 
18th Amendment to the Constitution. By majority the 18th 
Constitutional Amendment was upheld. In the said majority one 
judgment authored by Justice Sheikh Azmat Saeed was agreed 
to by 7 other Judges. However, it is to be noted that since the 
matter was heard by a Full Court of 17 Judges, the majority for 
the purposes of determining the ratio decidendi of the Court had 
to have the concurrence of at least 9 Judges.  
8.  
 
The 
respondents/intervenors 
have 
relied 
in 
particular on paragraph 112 of the judgment of Justice Sheikh 
Azmat Saeed to contend that it has been laid down therein that 
“decision of the party as to how to vote has been conferred upon 
the Party Head” and basing themselves on these words they 
Constitutional Petition No.22 of 2022. 
6 
 
submitted that the ruling of the Deputy Speaker dated 
22.07.2022 was correct. In our view the judgment in the 
District Bar Association case (supra) requires consideration on 
two planes. Firstly, as to whether it constitutes a binding 
precedent such as would constrain this Bench and require us to 
follow the same in preference over the short order dated 
17.05.2022 as regards Article 63A of the Constitution on the 
proscribed action and the consequences that such conduct 
would attract. Paragraph 112 referred to above and in particular 
the above quoted words relied upon do not form part of the ratio 
decidendi of the Court since (subject to what is said below) they 
did not constitute the views of the majority of the Judges on the 
Full Court. Other than the 8 Judges, who signed the judgment 
authored by Justice Sheikh Azmat Saeed, 6 other Judges also 
gave 
judgments 
dismissing 
the 
challenges 
to 
the 
18th 
Constitutional Amendment. Learned counsel for the petitioner 
has taken us through each of the judgments to submit that 
none of those other Judges have dealt with this particular point 
which is as to whether the Party Head can give any directions as 
contemplated by Article 63A(1)(b). Therefore, on this point the 
judgment being relied upon does not constitute binding 
precedent. The other aspect with regard to this paragraph read 
with paragraph 113 which was also made part of the 
submissions 
by 
learned 
counsel 
for 
the 
respondents/ 
intervenors was that one of us (Umar Ata Bandial, CJ) was also 
one of the 8 Judges who signed the judgment authored by 
Constitutional Petition No.22 of 2022. 
7 
 
Justice Sheikh Azmat Saeed. It was suggested that, therefore, 
this was yet another reason as to why the petition before us 
ought to be placed before the Full Court.  
9.  
 
We have very carefully considered this aspect of the 
matter, since it relates not just to a question of law but also that 
of propriety. In the end, we have come to the conclusion that 
the submissions made in this regard cannot be accepted. This is 
so for multiple reasons which will be elaborated upon in the 
detailed reasons. At present it suffices to note that the 
observations in paragraphs 112 and 113 of the judgment have 
no relation with the question of vires of Article 63A of the 
Constitution that was under consideration, as set out in 
paragraph 105 of the judgment. The said question is squarely 
dealt with and answered in paragraph 111 of the judgment with 
reference to the ratio decidendi in the Wukala Mahaz Barai 
Tahafaz Dastoor Vs. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1998 SC 
1263). Secondly, the observations in the judgment being relied 
upon with respect to Article 63A are discordant with the actual 
provisions thereof on the subject of issuance of direction to the 
members of the Parliamentary Party. In that sense, the 
observations even if they had had binding effect would have 
been per incuriam. In the above situation the observations in 
paragraphs 112 and 113 of the judgment are passing remarks 
not bearing relevance to the matter of vires nor explicating the 
actual or true words of the Constitution. Thirdly, if a Judge has 
unconsciously followed an incorrect view of the law, he has by 
Constitutional Petition No.22 of 2022. 
8 
 
conscious application of mind the freedom to adopt the correct 
view of the law subsequently. Fourthly, in the said case the 
concerned member of this Bench (Umar Ata Bandial, CJ) wrote 
a separate opinion in which other constitutional provisions that 
were under challenge were treated at length but no notice at all 
was taken of Article 63A or the 18th Constitutional Amendment. 
This reflects the insignificance of the said Constitutional 
provision as evidenced also by the opinions of Chief Justice 
Nasir-ul-Mulk, Justice Asif Saeed Khan Khosa and Justice Ejaz 
Afzal Khan which also did not consider Article 63A of the 
Constitution.    
10. 
 
As 
a 
last 
resort, 
learned 
counsel 
for 
the 
respondents/intervenors also relied upon the judgments in 
Sardar Sher Bahadur Khan (supra) and Zulfiqar Ahmed 
Bhutta (supra) to support their contention that the Party Head 
is the relevant person who has to issue a direction to the 
members of the Parliamentary Party under Article 63A(1)(b) of 
the Constitution. However, none of the cited cases substantiate 
this claim. 
11. 
 
In view of the foregoing and for detailed reasons to 
be recorded later and such elaboration and amplification as 
may be necessary, the titled constitutional petition is allowed. 
The sole question of public importance with reference to 
enforcement of fundamental rights involved in this petition is 
whether the understanding and implementation of the short 
judgment of this Court dated 17.05.2022 passed in Presidential 
Constitutional Petition No.22 of 2022. 
9 
 
Reference No.1 of 2022 read with Article 63A(1)(b) of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (“the 
Constitution”) was correct. We find that the understanding and 
implementation of the said short judgment as well as the 
provisions of Article 63A(1)(b) of the Constitution by the Deputy 
Speaker, Provincial Assembly of Punjab, Lahore (Respondent 
No.1) was patently incorrect and erroneous and cannot be 
sustained. The governance of the Province of Punjab in 
accordance with the Constitution has been subverted whereby 
the fundamental rights of the people have been seriously 
infringed.  As a result, the Ruling dated 22.07.2022 issued by 
Respondent No.1, Deputy Speaker, Punjab Assembly is set 
aside and declared to be void, without lawful authority and of 
no legal effect.  
12. 
 
In consequence of the above, having admittedly 
secured 186 votes as against 179 votes obtained by Mr.Hamza 
Shehbaz Sharif (Respondent No.2) in the runoff election of Chief 
Minister, Punjab held on 22.07.2022 pursuant to the consent 
order of this Court dated 01.07.2022 passed in Civil Petition 
No.2242 of 2022, Chaudhry Parvez Elahi (the petitioner) is 
declared as the duly elected Chief Minister, Punjab.  
13. 
 
We direct the Chief Secretary, Punjab (Respondent 
No.3) to immediately and forthwith and on announcement of 
this short order issue the requisite notification declaring the 
petitioner as the duly elected Chief Minister, Punjab. 
 
Constitutional Petition No.22 of 2022. 
10
 
14. 
 
In consequence of the foregoing, it is declared that 
Respondent No.2 not being the duly elected Chief Minister, the 
oath of office administered to him was and is without lawful 
authority and of no legal effect. Likewise all acts, deeds and 
things attendant and consequent upon such oath including but 
not limited to the notification of Respondent No.2 and the 
formation and swearing in of the Cabinet on his advice is also 
declared to be without lawful authority and of no legal effect.  
15. 
 
All Advisors, Special Advisors and Special Assistants 
etc (if any) by whatever name called appointed by, on behalf or 
under orders/advice of Respondent No.2 shall immediately and 
forthwith cease to hold office, their appointment is declared 
illegal and without lawful authority and the respondent No.2, 
the persons appointed as Minsters on his advice and the 
aforementioned persons are relieved of their offices/posts with 
immediate effect. 
16. 
 
We direct the Governor, Punjab to arrange and 
administer oath of office to the petitioner as the duly elected 
Chief Minister, Punjab in accordance with law and the 
Constitution not later than 11:30 pm tonight i.e. 26.07.2022. In 
case, the Governor, Punjab is unable or unwilling to administer 
such oath, the President of Pakistan may forthwith administer 
oath of office to the petitioner as Chief Minister, Punjab.  
17. 
 
All acts, deeds and things lawfully done or purported 
to be done by Respondent No.2 and or any Member of the 
Provincial Cabinet in accordance with the Constitution and the 
Constitutional Petition No.22 of 2022. 
11
 
law under colour of office are hereby saved and protected under 
the de facto doctrine subject to all just and legal exceptions and 
such review, modification, reversal or withdrawal as may be 
deemed appropriate by the incoming Chief Minister, Punjab and 
any member of the Cabinet or other officer appointed by him in 
accordance with law.  
18. 
 
The office shall immediately communicate/ transmit 
a copy of this order to the Governor Punjab, Respondent No.1 
(Deputy Speaker, Provincial Assembly of Punjab, Lahore) as well 
as Respondent No.3 (Chief Secretary, Punjab) for implementation 
and compliance of the same.  
 
Chief Justice 
 
Judge 
 
Judge 
ISLAMABAD.  
26.07.2022. 
ZR/* 
 
‘Approved For Reporting’  
