IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
(Original Jurisdiction) 
 
PRESENT: 
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL, CJ  
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN  
MR. JUSTICE SYED MANSOOR ALI SHAH 
 
 
CONST.P.21/2022 AND C.M.A.5029/2022  
 
1. 
Const.P.21/2022 
(Under 
Article 
184(3) 
for 
striking down the amendments 
made through the National 
Accountability 
(Amendment) 
Act, 2022 and the National 
Accountability 
(Second 
Amendment) Act, 2022 for 
being 
ultra 
vires 
to 
the 
Constitution) 
Imran Ahmad Khan Niazi v. 
Federation 
of 
Pakistan 
through Secretary, Law and 
Justice Division, Islamabad 
and another 
 
 
 
2. 
C.M.A.5029/2022 
IN Const.P.21/2022 
(Stay) 
Imran Ahmad Khan Niazi v. 
Federation 
of 
Pakistan 
through Secretary, Law and 
Justice Division, Islamabad 
and another 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the Petitioner(s)/ 
Applicant(s) 
: Khawaja Haris Ahmad, Sr. ASC 
Dr. Yasir Aman Khan, ASC 
Assisted by: 
Mr. Isaam Bin Haris, Advocate 
Ms. Zaynib Chaudhary, Advocate  
Mr. Muhammad Hashim Waqar, 
Advocate 
Barrister Faiza Asad, Advocate 
Mr. Muhammad Shoaib Ilyas, Advocate 
 
  
Federation/Respondent 
No.01 
: Mr. Muhammad Makhdoom Ali Khan, 
Sr. ASC 
Mr. Anis Muhammad Shahzad, AOR 
Assisted by: 
Mr. Saad Muhammad Hashmi, 
Advocate 
Mr. Umair Muhammad Malik, Advocate 
Kh. Aizaz Ahsan, Advocate 
Mr. Yawar Mukhtar, Advocate 
Kh. Azeem Armaghan, Advocate 
Mr. Waqar Umar Farooq, Advocate 
 
  
 
 Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP 
Malik Javed Iqbal Wains, Addl. AGP 
Raja Shafqat Abbasi, DAG 
 
  
NAB/Respondent No.02 
: Mr. Mumtaz Yousf, Addl. Prosecutor 
General 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
2
Mr. Muhammad Sattar Awan, Deputy 
Prosecutor General 
Qazi Babar Irshad, Special Prosecutor 
General 
Barrister Syeda Jugnu Kazmi, Special 
Prosecutor General 
 
  
Date of Hearings  
: 19.07.2022 
15.11.2022 
10.02.2023 
 
 29.07.2022 
16.11.2022 
14.02.2023 
 
 05.08.2022 
17.11.2022 
15.02.2023 
 
 19.08.2022 
06.12.2022 
16.02.2023 
 
 01.09.2022 
07.12.2022 
21.02.2023 
 
 04.10.2022 
08.12.2022 
22.02.2023 
 
 05.10.2022 
12.12.2022 
23.02.2023 
 
 06.10.2022 
13.12.2022 
14.03.2023 
 
 10.10.2022 
14.12.2022 
15.03.2023 
 
 11.10.2022 
10.01.2023 
16.03.2023 
 
 12.10.2022 
11.01.2023 
16.05.2023 
 
 18.10.2022 
12.01.2023 
18.08.2023 
 
 19.10.2022 
17.01.2023 
29.08.2023 
 
 24.10.2022 
18.01.2023 
30.08.2023 
 
 08.11.2022 
19.01.2023 
31.08.2023 
 
 09.11.2022 
07.02.2023 
01.09.2023 
 
 10.11.2022 
08.02.2023 
and 
 
 14.11.2022 
09.02.2023 
05.09.2023 
 
  
J U D G M E N T 
  
 
UMAR ATA BANDIAL, CJ:  
Surah Al-Anfal, Verse 27: 
“O ye that believe! betray not the trust of Allah 
and the Messenger, nor misappropriate knowingly 
things entrusted to you.” 
(Translation by Yusuf Ali) 
Through the present Constitution Petition No.21 of 2022 the 
petitioner has challenged the amendments made to the National 
Accountability Ordinance, 1999 (“NAB Ordinance”) by the 
National 
Accountability 
(Amendment) 
Act, 
2022 
(“First 
Amendment”) 
and 
the 
National 
Accountability 
(Second 
Amendment) Act, 2022 (“Second Amendment”) (collectively 
referred to as the “2022 Amendments”).  
Origins and Content of the Unamended NAB Ordinance  
2.  
 
Before delving into the facts giving rise to the present 
petition it would be appropriate to briefly set out the origins and 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
3
history of the NAB Ordinance. The NAB Ordinance was a successor 
of the Ehtesab Act, 1997 and was promulgated by the then Chief 
Executive of Pakistan, General Pervez Musharraf, on 16.11.1999 
with retrospective effect from 01.01.01985. The NAB Ordinance is 
a special law enacted to ‘eradicate corruption and corrupt practices 
and hold accountable all those persons accused of such practices.’ 
To achieve its purposes the NAB Ordinance: 
i. 
Set up Special Courts for conducting trials of the offence of 
corruption and corrupt practices [refer Sections 5(g) and 16 
of the NAB Ordinance prior to the 2022 Amendments]; 
ii. 
Defined the categories of holders of public office who are 
subject to the NAB Ordinance. The two main categories are 
parliamentarians (“elected holders of public office”) and 
‘persons in the service of Pakistan’ [refer Section 5(m) of the 
NAB Ordinance prior to the 2022 Amendments]; 
iii. 
Expanded the class of persons who could be investigated 
and prosecuted for the offence of corruption and corrupt 
practices [refer Section 5(o) of the NAB Ordinance prior to 
the 2022 Amendments];  
iv. 
Set up the NAB for the purposes of conducting pre-trial 
inquiries and investigations in relation to the offence of 
corruption and corrupt practices and to prosecute the same 
[refer Section 6 of the NAB Ordinance prior to the 2022 
Amendments]; 
v. 
Retained certain categories of the offence of corruption and 
corrupt practices from previous accountability laws whilst 
also adding certain new categories such as ‘misuse of 
authority’ and ‘wilful default’ [refer Section 9(a)(vi) and (viii) 
of the NAB Ordinance prior to the 2022 Amendments]; 
vi. 
Declared the offence of corruption and corrupt practices 
non-bailable [refer Section 9(b) of the NAB Ordinance prior to 
the 2022 Amendments];  
vii. 
Retained certain evidentiary presumptions against accused 
persons whilst also adding a new category of presumption for 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
4
persons accused of misusing their authority [refer Section 14 
of the NAB Ordinance prior to the 2022 Amendments]; 
viii. 
Permitted the Chairman NAB or any authorised officer of the 
Federal Government to seek mutual legal assistance from 
foreign States [refer Section 21 of the NAB Ordinance prior to 
the 2022 Amendments]; and 
ix. 
Introduced the concept of a plea bargain [refer Section 25(b) 
of the NAB Ordinance prior to the 2022 Amendments]. 
3.  
 
The vires of the NAB Ordinance were challenged soon 
after its promulgation but the Court in Khan Asfandyar Wali Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2001 SC 607) upheld its provisions 
albeit with certain directions and observations. Since then despite 
three elected governments coming into power the NAB Ordinance 
has not been repealed and it remains the premier accountability 
law in the country.  
Factual Background 
4.  
 
With the above context we can now lay down the facts 
relevant to the present petition. On 22.06.2022 the First 
Amendment to the NAB Ordinance became an Act of Parliament. 
Its essential features are: 
i. 
Its provisions have deemed effect from the date of 
commencement of the NAB Ordinance i.e., 01.01.1985 [refer 
Section 1(2) of the First Amendment]; 
ii. 
It excludes the decisions, advice, reports, opinions tendered 
by and works, functions, projects, schemes executed by 
holders of public office and public/governmental bodies from 
the ambit of the NAB unless there is proof of the holders of 
public office or persons acting on their behalf having 
received any monetary or material benefit from the decisions, 
advice, reports, opinions, works, functions, projects or 
schemes [refer Section 2 of the First Amendment];  
iii. 
It has defined ‘public at large’ to mean at least 100 persons 
[refer Section 3 of the First Amendment]; 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
5
iv. 
It has altered the ingredients of the offences listed in Section 
9(a)(v), (vi) and (ix) of the NAB Ordinance [refer Section 8 of 
the First Amendment]; 
v. 
It has given Accountability Courts the power to grant bail to 
accused persons [refer Section 8 of the First Amendment]; 
vi. 
It has omitted Section 14 of the NAB Ordinance which 
allowed the Accountability Court to draw various evidentiary 
presumptions against the accused [refer Section 10 of the 
First Amendment]; 
vii. 
It has omitted Section 21(g) of the NAB Ordinance which 
allowed evidentiary material transferred by a foreign 
Government to be receivable as evidence in legal proceedings 
notwithstanding the provisions of the Qanun-e-Shahadat 
Order, 1984 [refer Section 14 of the First Amendment]; and  
viii. 
It has reduced the period of custody of the accused for the 
purposes of inquiry and investigation from 90 days to 14 
days [refer Section 16 of the First Amendment]. 
5.  
 
On 
25.06.2022 
the 
petitioner 
filed 
the 
titled 
Constitution Petition with the prayer that the First Amendment be 
struck down (albeit with the exception of a few beneficial changes) 
for violating the Fundamental Rights of the people of Pakistan 
enshrined in Articles 9 (security of person), 14 (inviolability of 
dignity of man), 19A (right to information), 24 (protection of 
property rights) and 25 (equality of citizens) of the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (“Constitution”).  
6.  
 
The first hearing in the case took place on 19.07.2022. 
During the course of the petitioner’s arguments the Second 
Amendment also became an Act of Parliament on 12.08.2022. The 
significant features of this amendment are: 
i. 
Its provisions have deemed effect from the date of 
commencement of the NAB Ordinance i.e., 01.01.1985 [refer 
Section 1(2) of the Second Amendment]; 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
6
ii. 
It has enlarged the category of holders of public office and 
public/governmental bodies excluded from the jurisdiction of 
the NAB [refer Section 2 of the Second Amendment]; 
iii. 
It has limited the pecuniary jurisdiction of the NAB to cases 
involving loss of Rs.500 million or more thereby rendering 
the NAB incompetent to investigate and prosecute offences of 
corruption and corrupt practices which have caused a loss of 
less than Rs.500 million [refer Section 3 of the Second 
Amendment]; and 
iv. 
It has provided accused persons with the opportunity to 
renege from the plea bargains entered into by them and 
approved by the Accountability Court if they fail to make the 
complete payment as approved by the Accountability Court 
[refer Section 14 of the Second Amendment]. 
The petitioner filed an application on 31.08.2022 for amending his 
Constitution Petition to also challenge the Second Amendment on 
the touchstone of the Fundamental Rights already raised in 
respect of the First Amendment. This application was allowed by 
the Court on 01.09.2022 with the consent of the learned counsel 
for the respondent Federation. Thereafter, the proceedings 
continued for more than a year and comprised of 53 hearings in 
total. During this period of one year two further amendments were 
passed in relation to the NAB Ordinance, namely: 
i. 
The National Accountability (Amendment) Act, 2023 which 
became an Act of Parliament on 29.05.2023 (“2023 Act”). 
This Act has primarily amended Section 4 of the NAB 
Ordinance to provide a transfer mechanism for pending 
inquiries, investigations and references to the relevant 
agency, authority, department, court, tribunal or forum 
[refer Section 2 of the 2023 Act]; and 
ii. 
The National Accountability (Amendment) Ordinance, 2023 
which was promulgated on 03.07.2023 (“2023 Ordinance”) 
by the President. The main feature of this Ordinance is that 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
7
it has re-inserted the evidentiary presumptions against the 
accused for certain categories of the offence of corruption 
and corrupt practices [refer Section 2 of the 2023 
Ordinance]. Although this Ordinance has retrospective effect 
from the date of commencement of the NAB Ordinance the 
restoration of the presumptions will have no effect on the 
references that have already been returned by the 
Accountability Courts to the NAB due to the 2022 
Amendments. The 2023 Ordinance has therefore brought 
about only a cosmetic change in the NAB Ordinance and it 
does not rectify the deficiency created by the omission of the 
presumptions by the First Amendment. 
Although learned counsel for the petitioner filed his written 
submissions on the amendments brought about in the NAB 
Ordinance by the 2023 Act, the primary focus of the proceedings 
remained the 2022 Amendments and this judgment shall also only 
examine the vires of the 2022 Amendments though mention may 
be made of the 2023 Act and the 2023 Ordinance in passing.  
7.  
 
It is also pertinent to mention here that as a result of 
the 2022 Amendments a large number of references filed by the 
NAB in the Accountability Courts were affected. The data, as 
provided by the Addl. Prosecutor General, NAB, is set out below: 
i. 
386 references were returned by the Accountability Courts to 
NAB in 2022 whereas 212 references were returned in 2023. 
Therefore, a total of 598 references have been returned so 
far. Of these 35 references pertain to elected holders of 
public office; 
ii. 
The public money involved in the returned references is more 
than Rs.150 billion; 
iii. 
327 of the 386 references were returned in 2022 due to the 
minimum pecuniary jurisdiction of the NAB being increased 
to Rs.500 million under the Second Amendment;  
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
8
iv. 
Out of the 598 returned references only 54 have yet been 
transferred to other courts for further action of which 17 
have been transferred to the Custom Court and 4 to the 
Banking Court. As a result, 544 references are with the NAB 
in storage; and  
v. 
127 references remain with the Accountability Courts after 
the 2022 Amendments. 
Comparative Table of the 2022 Amendments 
8.  
 
Before we examine the contentions of the learned 
counsel for the parties, a comparative table detailing the pivotal 
changes brought about in the content of the NAB Ordinance by the 
2022 Amendments is produced below: 
NAB Ordinance Prior to the 2022 
Amendments 
2022 Amendments 
4. Application: It extends to the whole of 
Pakistan and shall apply to all persons in 
Pakistan, all citizens of Pakistan and persons 
who are or have been in the service of Pakistan 
wherever they may be, including areas which are 
part of Federally and Provincially Administered 
Tribal Areas. 
 
4. Application: (1) This Ordinance extends to the 
whole of Pakistan and shall apply to all persons, 
including those persons who are or have been in the 
service of Pakistan, except persons and transactions 
specified in sub-section (2). 
 
(2) The provisions of this Ordinance shall not be 
applicable to the following persons or transactions, 
namely:-  
(a) all matters pertaining to Federal, Provincial or 
Local taxation, other levies or imposts, including 
refunds, or loss of exchequer pertaining to taxation, 
transactions or amounts duly covered by amnesty 
schemes of Government of Pakistan;  
 
(b) decisions of Federal or Provincial Cabinet, their 
Committees or Sub-Committees, Council of Common 
Interests (CCI), National Economic Council (NEC), 
National Finance Commission (NFC), Executive 
Committee of the National Economic Council 
(ECNEC), 
Central 
Development 
Working 
Party 
(CDWP), Provincial Development Working Party 
(PDWP), Departmental Development Working Party 
(DDWP), Board of Directors of State Owned 
Enterprises (SOEs), Board of Trustees/Directors of 
all Statutory Bodies, the State Bank of Pakistan and 
such other bodies except where the holder of the 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
9
public office has received a monetary gain as a 
result of such decision;  
 
(c) any person or entity who, or transaction in 
relation thereto, which are not directly or indirectly 
connected with the holder of a public office except 
offences falling under clauses (ix), (x) and (xi) of sub-
section (a) of section 9;  
 
(d) procedural lapses in performance of any public or 
governmental work or function, project or scheme, 
unless there is evidence to prove that a holder of 
public office or any other person acting on his behalf 
has been conferred or has received any monetary or 
other material benefit from that particular public or 
governmental work or function, whether directly or 
indirectly on account of such procedural lapses, 
which the said recipient was otherwise not entitled 
to receive;  
 
(e) a decision taken, an advice, report or opinion 
rendered or given by a public office holder or any 
other person in the course of his duty, unless there 
is sufficient evidence to show that the holder of 
public office or any other person acting on his behalf 
received or gained any monetary or other material 
benefit, from that decision, advice, report or opinion, 
whether directly or indirectly, which the said 
recipient was otherwise not entitled to receive;  
 
(f) all matters, which have been decided by, or fall 
within 
the 
jurisdiction of 
a 
regulatory 
body 
established under a Federal or Provincial law; and 
 
(g) all matters where the funds, property or interest 
not involving or belonging to the appropriate 
government, except for the offences under clauses 
(ix), (x) or (xi) of sub-section (a) of section 9. 
5. Definitions: … 
(n) “Offence” means the offences of corruption 
and corrupt practices and other offences as 
defined in this Ordinance and includes the 
offences specified in the Schedule to this 
Ordinance. 
5. Definitions: … 
(o) “Offence” means the offences of corruption and 
corrupt practices and other offences as defined in 
this Ordinance of value not less than five hundred 
million rupees and includes the offences specified in 
the Schedule to this Ordinance; 
9. Corruption and Corrupt Practices: (a) A 
holder of a public office, or any other person, is 
said to commit or to have committed the offence 
9. Corruption and Corrupt Practices: (a) A holder 
of a public office, or any other person, is said to 
commit or to have committed the offence of 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
10
of corruption and corrupt practices— 
… 
(v) if he or any of his dependents or benamidars 
owns, possesses, or has acquired right or title in 
any assets or holds irrevocable power of attorney 
in respect of any assets or pecuniary resources 
disproportionate to his known sources of 
income, which he cannot reasonably account for 
or maintains a standard of living beyond that 
which is commensurate with his sources of 
income; 
corruption and corrupt practices— 
… 
(v) if he or any of his dependents or other 
benamidars, through corrupt and dishonest means, 
owns, possesses or acquires rights or title in assets 
substantially disproportionate to his known sources 
of income which he cannot reasonably account for.  
      Explanation I.– The valuation of immovable 
property shall be reckoned on the date of purchase 
either according to the actual price shown in the 
relevant title documents or the applicable rates 
prescribed by District Collector or the Federal Board 
of Revenue whichever is higher. No evidence 
contrary to the later shall be admissible.  
      Explanation II.– For the purpose of calculation 
of movable assets, the sum total of credit entries of 
bank account shall not be treated as an asset. Bank 
balance of an account on the date of initiation of 
inquiry may be treated as a movable asset. A 
banking transaction shall not be treated as an asset 
unless there is evidence of creation of corresponding 
asset through that transaction. 
14. Presumption against accused accepting 
illegal gratification:  
a. Where in any trial of an offence under clauses 
(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of subsection (a) of section 9 it 
is proved that an accused person has accepted 
or obtained, or has agreed to accept or attempted 
to obtain, for himself or for any other person any 
gratification, other than legal remuneration, or 
any valuable thing, or any pecuniary advantage 
from a person or any agent of a person, for any 
favour shown or promised to be shown by the 
accused, it shall be presumed, unless the 
contrary is proved, that he accepted or obtained, 
or agreed to accept or attempted to obtain, that 
gratification or that valuable thing or pecuniary 
advantage for himself or some other person, as 
the case may be, as a motive or a reward such as 
is specified in section 161 to 163 of the Pakistan 
Penal Code, 1860, (Act XLV of 1860), or, as the 
case may be, without consideration, or for a 
consideration 
which 
he 
believed 
to 
be 
inadequate.  
 
b. Wherein any trial of an offence punishable 
under section 165A of the Pakistan Penal Code, 
Section 14 omitted. 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
11
1860 (Act XLV of 1860) it is proved that any 
gratification, other than legal remuneration or 
any valuable thing has been given, or offered to 
be given, or attempted to be given, by any 
accused person, it shall be presumed, unless the 
contrary is proved, that he gave or offered to 
give, or attempted to give, that gratification, or 
that valuable thing, as the case may be, as a 
motive or a reward such as is specified in section 
161 to 163 of the said Code, or, as the case may 
be without consideration or for a consideration 
which he believed to be inadequate. 
c. In any trial, of an offence punishable under 
clause (v) of sub-section (a) of section 9 of this 
Ordinance, the fact that the accused person or 
any other person on his behalf, is in possession, 
for 
which 
the 
accused 
person 
cannot 
satisfactorily account, of assets or pecuniary 
resources disproportionate to his known source 
of income, or that such person has, at or about 
the time of the commission of the, offence with 
which he is charged, obtained an accretion to his 
pecuniary resources or property for which he 
cannot satisfactorily account, the Court shall 
presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the 
accused person is guilty of the offence of 
corruption and corrupt practices and his 
conviction therefor shall not be invalid by reason 
only that it is based solely on such a 
presumption.  
 
d. In any trial of an offence under clause (vi) and 
(vii) of section 9 the burden of proof that he used 
his authority, or issued any directive, or 
authorized the issuance of any policy or 
statutory rule or, order (SRO), or made any grant 
or allowed any concession, in the public interest, 
fairly, justly, and for the advancement of the 
purpose of the enactment under which the 
authority was used, directive or policy or rule or 
order was issued or grant was made or 
concession was allowed shall lie on the accused, 
and in the absence of such proof the accused 
shall be guilty of the offence, and his conviction 
shall not be invalid by the reason that it is based 
solely on such presumption: 
      Provided that the prosecution shall first 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
12
make out a reasonable case against the accused 
charged under clause (vi) or clause (vii) of sub-
section (a) of section 9. 
21. International Cooperation Request for 
mutual legal assistance: The Chairman NAB or 
any 
officer 
authorized 
by 
the 
Federal 
Government may request a Foreign State to do 
any or all of the following acts in accordance 
with the law of such State:— 
… 
(g) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Qanun-e-Shahadat Order 1984 (P.O. 10 of 1984) 
or any other law for the time being in force all 
evidence, documents or any other material 
transferred to Pakistan by a Foreign Government 
shall 
be 
receivable 
as 
evidence 
in 
legal 
proceedings under this Ordinance; 
Section 21(g) omitted. 
25. Voluntary return and plea bargain: … 
(b) Where at any time after the authorization of 
investigation, before or after the commencement 
of the trial or during the pendency of an appeal, 
the accused offers to return to the NAB the 
assets or gains acquired or made by him in the 
course, or as a consequence, of any offence 
under this Ordinance, the Chairman, NAB, may, 
in his discretion, after taking into consideration 
the facts and circumstances of the case, accept 
the offer on such terms and conditions as he 
may consider necessary, and if the accused 
agrees to return to the NAB the amount 
determined 
by 
the 
Chairman, 
NAB, 
the 
Chairman, NAB, shall refer the case for the 
approval of the Court, or as the case may be, the 
Appellate Court and for the release of the 
accused. 
25. Voluntary return and plea bargain: … 
(b) Where at any time after the authorization of 
investigation, before or after the commencement of 
the trial or during the pendency of an appeal, the 
accused offers to return to the NAB the assets or 
gains acquired or made by him in the course, or as a 
consequence, of any offence under this Ordinance, 
the Chairman, NAB, may, in his discretion, after 
taking 
into 
consideration 
the 
facts 
and 
circumstances of the case, accept the offer on such 
terms and conditions as he may consider necessary, 
and if the accused agrees to return to the NAB the 
amount determined by the Chairman, NAB, the 
Chairman, NAB, shall refer the case for the approval 
of the Court, or as the case may be, the Appellate 
Court and for the release of the accused: 
      Provided that statement of an accused entering 
into plea bargain or voluntary return shall not 
prejudice case of any other accused: 
      Provided further that in case of failure of 
accused to make payment in accordance with the 
plea bargain agreement approved by the Court, the 
agreement of plea bargain shall become inoperative 
to the rights of the parties immediately. 
 
9.  
 
It may be noticed from the provisions produced above 
that the 2022 Amendments have indeed brought about a 
significant change in the legal position under the NAB Ordinance. 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
13
Whereas prior to the 2022 Amendments the NAB Ordinance 
applied to all persons in Pakistan after the 2022 Amendments the 
scope of NAB Ordinance has been significantly restricted with 
nearly all holders of public office exempted from its application 
unless there is proof of any monetary or material benefit being 
received by them or a person acting on their behalf. However, even 
if the NAB manages to overcome the exceptions listed in the 
amended Section 4 of the NAB Ordinance the jurisdictional hurdle 
of an accused having caused a minimum loss of Rs.500 million or 
more would still need to be crossed. If that is not done the accused 
will be ousted from the jurisdiction of the NAB. Therefore, it is only 
when the requirements of Section 4 and Section 5(o) of the NAB 
Ordinance (as altered by the 2022 Amendments) are satisfied can 
the accused person be inquired/investigated into by the NAB and 
be tried in the Accountability Court.  
10.   
However, by the addition of the new conditions in and 
explanations to Section 9(a)(v) coupled with the omission of Section 
21(g) that permitted the admission of foreign evidentiary material 
in legal proceedings under the mutual legal assistance regime set 
up by the United Nations Convention against Corruption, the 
burden cast on the prosecution to establish that a holder of public 
office has accumulated unaccounted domestic (or foreign) assets 
beyond his means has been made formidable. Along with that the 
presumption noted in Section 14(c) has also been deleted. The 
result of these amendments relating to proof of the offence of 
accumulated 
assets 
beyond 
means 
will 
be 
that 
in 
the 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
14
 future few persons will be prosecuted for such an offence by the 
NAB with still lesser convictions under Section 9(a)(v). The above 
result is in addition to the effect that the 2022 Amendments 
envisage the return of pending inquiries, investigations and 
references but do not provide any mechanism for then transferring 
them to the relevant agency, authority, department, court, tribunal 
or forum. That procedure was provided for the first time by the 
2023 Act. However, the 2023 Act is applicable to only those 
inquiries, investigations and references of which either the NAB or 
the Accountability Court is seized. As noted above, there are 
hundreds of references that have been returned by the 
Accountability Courts to the NAB pursuant to the 2022 
Amendments and prior to the 2023 Act. These references returned 
in the interregnum between the two amendments have gone into 
limbo, a fact affirmed by the record supplied by the Additional 
Prosecutor General, NAB. 
11.   
At this stage it would also be appropriate to note that 
the offence of corruption and corrupt practice is an umbrella term 
used to describe different categories of offences noted in Section 
9(a) of the NAB Ordinance. The 2022 Amendments have changed 
three such categories, namely: 
i. 
Assets beyond means [refer Section 9(a)(v) of the NAB 
Ordinance]; 
ii. 
Misuse of authority [refer Section 9(a)(vi) of the NAB 
Ordinance]; and  
iii. 
Cheating [refer Section 9(a)(ix) of the NAB Ordinance]. 
Additionally, Section 9(a)(vii) which criminalised the issuance of 
any directive, policy, SRO or any other order which granted undue 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
15
concession or benefit to the holder of public office, his relative, 
associate, benamidar or any other person has been omitted by the 
First Amendment. This judgment, however, shall only deal with 
Section 9(a)(v) as that is the category of the offence of corruption 
and corrupt practices which prima facie appears to have the widest 
implications of an adverse nature on the Fundamental Rights of 
the people.  
Arguments of Counsel 
12.   
Both the learned counsel for the petitioner and the 
learned counsel for the respondent Federation made extensive 
submissions on the maintainability and merits of the petition. 
Their main contentions were: 
A. Submissions by the Petitioner 
i. 
The titled petition is maintainable under Article 184(3) 
of the Constitution as the 2022 Amendments directly 
and adversely affect the Fundamental Rights of the 
people of Pakistan i.e., Articles 9, 14, 19A, 24 and 25 
and violate a salient feature of the Constitution, 
namely, Parliamentary form of Government blended 
with Islamic provisions; 
ii. 
The provisions of the 2022 Amendments have 
effectively decriminalised the offence of ‘corruption and 
corrupt practices’ thereby allowing the holders of 
public office to retain their ill-gotten wealth whilst 
being exempted from prosecution under the NAB 
Ordinance. 
The 
specific 
sections 
of 
the 
2022 
Amendments 
that 
decriminalise 
the 
offence 
of 
‘corruption and corrupt practices’ and exclude holders 
of public office from the province of the NAB will be 
discussed later in the judgment; and  
iii. 
The Court is empowered under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution 
to 
either 
strike 
down 
the 
2022 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
16
Amendments or to direct the Federation to bring the 
2022 Amendments in line with the requirements of the 
Constitution and Fundamental Rights.  
B. Submissions by the Respondent Federation 
i. 
The instant Constitution Petition is not maintainable 
because it does not satisfy the twin criteria laid down 
in Article 184(3) of the Constitution, the petitioner 
lacks bona fide and locus standi to challenge the 2022 
Amendments and the petition at the present stage is 
premature and based on speculations and conjectures;  
ii. 
No cogent reason has been given by the petitioner for 
not challenging the 2022 Amendments before the High 
Courts;  
iii. 
The 2022 Amendments have been enacted after taking 
into consideration the criticisms levelled against the 
NAB Ordinance, including by the Superior Judiciary in 
its judgments/orders; and  
iv. 
An incorrect perception is being created that the 2022 
Amendments have decriminalised the offence of 
corruption and corrupt practices because there exist 
other accountability foras in the country which can 
investigate, prosecute and try accused persons for the 
offences which no longer fall within the ambit of the 
NAB.  
13.   
Apart from the above submissions, information was 
also sought from the Additional Prosecutor General, NAB 
(produced above in para 7) regarding the particulars of the 
references that have been returned to the NAB pursuant to the 
2022 Amendments and their fate since. Written submissions were 
also provided by the learned Attorney General for Pakistan who 
predominantly attacked the maintainability of the present petition 
and endorsed the submissions of the learned counsel for the 
respondent Federation in toto.  
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
17
14.   
Having heard the learned counsel for all the parties 
and having examined the available record the Court reserved its 
judgment on 05.09.2023. Our decision on the present petition and 
the reasons for the same are set out hereinbelow. 
Maintainability 
15.   
The learned counsel for the respondent Federation 
strongly objected to the maintainability of the titled petition for 
failing to satisfy the jurisdictional requirements of Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution. It was his case that the petitioner had failed to 
identify the precise Fundamental Right that had been violated by 
the 2022 Amendments. Additionally, he submitted that the 
petitioner lacked locus standi and bona fides to challenge the 2022 
Amendments because firstly, when he was Prime Minister his 
government introduced many of the amendments that have been 
consolidated by the 2022 Amendments and secondly, he had 
committed a dereliction of duty by refusing to sit in the National 
Assembly and raise concerns regarding the 2022 Amendments 
therein. Learned counsel also stated that the dispute raised by the 
petition in respect of the 2022 Amendments is hypothetical as 
there are no facts before the Court as a result of which the Court 
will be considering and deciding the question of vires of the 2022 
Amendments in the abstract.  
16.   
In response, learned counsel for the petitioner 
consistently maintained his stance that the cumulative effect of the 
2022 Amendments is that the offence of corruption and corrupt 
practices committed by the holders of public office has been 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
18
decriminalised thereby violating the following Fundamental Rights 
of the people of Pakistan:  
“9. Security of person. No person shall be 
deprived of life or liberty save in accordance with 
law. 
 
14. Inviolability of dignity of man, etc. (1) The 
dignity of man and, subject to law, the privacy of 
home, shall be inviolable. 
 
24. Protection of property rights. (1) No person 
shall be compulsorily deprived of his property 
save in accordance with law. 
 
25. Equality of citizens. (1) All citizens are equal 
before law and are entitled to equal protection of 
law.” 
Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that since the 
2022 Amendments directly and adversely affect the Fundamental 
Rights of the public not only are the conditions of Article 184(3) 
satisfied but also the objections of learned counsel for the 
respondent Federation regarding bona fides and locus standi of the 
petitioner lose force.  
17.   
As the learned counsel for the respondent Federation 
has primarily attacked the maintainability of the instant 
Constitution Petition, we shall examine that question first. The 
Court has been conferred original jurisdiction by Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution which reads: 
“184. Original jurisdiction of Supreme Court. 
… 
 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 
199, the Supreme Court shall, if it considers that 
a question of public importance with reference to 
the enforcement of any of the Fundamental 
Rights conferred by Chapter I of Part II is 
involved, have the power to make an order of the 
nature mentioned in the said Article.” 
By virtue of the afore-noted provision the Court can pass 
appropriate orders in cases where the enforcement of a 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
19
Fundamental Right(s) affecting the public at large is involved. It is 
by now well-established in our jurisprudence that acts of 
corruption and corrupt practices do infringe the Fundamental 
Rights of the public and thus meet the test of Article 184(3). 
Reliance in this regard is placed on the decisions of the Court in 
Suo Motu Case No.19 of 2016 (2017 SCMR 683); Corruption in 
Hajj Arrangements in 2010 (PLD 2011 SC 963); Bank of Punjab 
Vs. Haris Steel Industries (Pvt.) Ltd. (PLD 2010 SC 1109). For 
reference relevant passages from the cases of Corruption in Hajj 
Arrangements (supra) and Bank of Punjab are produced below: 
“Corruption in Hajj Arrangements 
28. …However, when the cases of massive 
corruption, not only one, but so many came for 
hearing, therefore, this Court in the exercise of its 
constitutional 
jurisdiction 
had 
enforced 
fundamental rights of the citizens under Articles 
4, 
9, 
14 
and 
25 
of 
the 
Constitution… 
Undoubtedly, whenever the Court will notice that 
there is corruption or corrupt practices, it would 
be very difficult to compromise or digest it 
because the public money of the country cannot 
be allowed to be looted by any one whatsoever 
status he may have. 
 
Bank of Punjab 
25. A perusal of the above quoted provision [Art 
184(3)] would demonstrate that this Court was 
possessed of powers to make any order of the 
nature 
mentioned 
in 
Article-199 
of 
the 
Constitution, if, in the opinion of this Court, a 
question of public importance relating to the 
enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights 
was involved in the matter[.] As has been 
mentioned in the preceding parts of this order, 
what was at stake was not only a colossal amount 
of money/property belonging to at least one 
million depositors i.e. a large section of the public 
but what was reportedly at stake was also the 
very existence of the Bank of Punjab which could 
have sunk on account of the mega fraud in 
question and with which would have drowned not 
only the said one million depositors but even 
others dealing with the said Bank. And what had 
been sought from this Court was the protection 
and defence of the said public property. It was 
thus not only the right of this Court but in fact its 
onerous obligation to intervene to defend the said 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
20
assault on the said fundamental right to life and 
to property of the said public.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
18.   
Although 
learned 
counsel 
for 
the 
respondent 
Federation had no cavil with the proposition that the Court can 
undertake proceedings in the original jurisdiction to check 
corruption and corrupt practices committed by the holders of 
public office, he stressed that unlike the cases previously decided 
by the Court the instant matter pinpoints no specific act of 
corruption and/or corrupt practice. In fact, the entire controversy 
raised by the petitioner is conjectural and academic. However, we 
are not persuaded with this argument of learned counsel because 
as noted above in paras 7 and 9-10, the 2022 Amendments have 
limited the NAB’s jurisdiction thus excluding hundreds of pending 
references from trial before any forum and have also made the 
proof of the offence of corruption and corrupt practices 
significantly harder for references that satisfy the jurisdictional 
requirements of Section 4 and Section 5(o) of the NAB Ordinance. 
We think it would be a legal absurdity to hold that whilst the Court 
can take cognizance of individual acts of corruption and corrupt 
practices under Article 184(3) it cannot do so when amendments 
have been introduced in the accountability law i.e., the NAB 
Ordinance which exclude the jurisdiction of the NAB to investigate 
and prosecute holders of public office in two significant respects 
thereby ex-facie violating Articles 9, 14, 23 and 24 of the 
Constitution by exonerating the holders of public office from their 
alleged acts of corruption and corrupt practices by failing to 
provide a forum for their trial. The 2022 Amendments have 
therefore rendered the NAB toothless in accomplishing its objective 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
21
of ‘eradicat[ing] corruption and corrupt practices and hold[ing] 
accountable all those persons accused of such practices’ and have 
left public property belonging to the people of Pakistan vulnerable 
to waste and malfeasance by the holders of public office. Such 
interference in the NAB’s jurisdiction and powers most certainly 
affects the Fundamental Rights of the people at large as noted by 
the Court in Progress Report of NAB in OGRA Case (2015 SCMR 
1813): 
“3. …We may emphasize that NAB has been 
created 
as 
a 
principal 
watchdog 
against 
corruption in Pakistan. Corruption is itself 
rightly perceived as eating into the very 
foundation and vitals of society. A corruption 
watchdog which, therefore, does not function 
efficiently adversely affects inter alia, the 
fundamental rights in Articles 14, 18, 19A, 23 
and 24 of the Constitution.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
Although the above observation was made by the Court in the 
context of the NAB’s poor handling of the Oil and Gas Regulatory 
Authority Scam, we see no reason why the same rationale cannot 
apply to the present matter where the legislature through the 2022 
Amendments has left the NAB ineffective in pursuing cases of 
corruption and corrupt practices exposing the public property of 
the people to misappropriation. We accordingly hold that the 
present Constitution Petition fulfils the requirements of Article 
184(3) of the Constitution and so is maintainable.  
19.   
Be that as it may, the learned counsel for the 
respondent Federation raised other preliminary objections to the 
petition as well. One of them being that the petitioner does not 
possess either locus standi or bona fides to challenge the 2022 
Amendments because he never questioned the 2022 Amendments 
in Parliament. However, it is settled law that when the Court 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
22
exercises jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution it is 
not concerned with the antecedents or standing of the person who 
has filed the petition because that person is merely acting as an 
informant. Instead, the Court favours a substantive approach 
focusing more on the content of the petition and whether the same 
crosses the threshold set out in Article 184(3). In this respect, we 
are fortified by the dicta of the Court in Muhammad Yasin Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2012 SC 132): 
“24. Before concluding our discussion on the 
issue of maintainability of this petition we need to 
address the respondent's submission that the 
petition has been filed mala fide. We have found 
no lawful basis for this submission… we have 
already held in the case titled Moulvi Iqbal Haider 
versus 
Capital 
Development 
Authority 
and 
others (2006 SC 394 at 413) that the contents of a 
petition under Article 184 (3) ibid will override 
concerns arising on account of the conduct or 
antecedents of a petitioner…”  
(emphasis supplied) 
Likewise, the Court in Muhammad Ashraf Tiwana Vs. Pakistan 
(2013 SCMR 1159) observed that: 
“16. …The questions which the contents of this 
petition have brought to light are, without doubt, 
matters of public importance and, as discussed 
above relate directly to the enforcement of 
fundamental rights. Therefore, concerns about 
the conduct or antecedents of the petitioner, if 
any, would stand overridden by the contents of 
the petition. We may also emphasize that exercise 
of jurisdiction under Article 184(3) ibid is not 
dependent on the existence of a petitioner…” 
(emphasis supplied) 
20.   
We have already noted above that the instant petition 
satisfies 
the 
conditions 
of 
Article 
184(3), 
therefore, 
any 
apprehensions about the locus standi and bona fides of the 
petitioner stand overridden. Insofar as the prior amendments 
passed during the petitioner’s term as Prime Minister are 
concerned, 
the 
same 
were 
promulgated 
through 
different 
Ordinances all of which have lapsed and are no longer in the field. 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
23
On the other hand, the 2022 Amendments have come into being 
through Acts of Parliament and will remain on the statute book 
unless these are repealed by Parliament in the future. Further, the 
amendments brought about in the petitioner’s tenure did not 
contain analogous retrospectivity clauses, as exist in the 2022 
Amendments, as a result of which the impact of the Ordinances on 
pending references and past and closed transactions was limited.  
21.   
The learned counsel for the respondent Federation also 
submitted that the petitioner could have voiced his grievances 
against the 2022 Amendments in the National Assembly as a 
member of the Opposition. Indeed, in the Court’s recent judgment 
reported as Pakistan Peoples Party Parliamentarians Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2022 SC 574) the necessity of a 
robust Opposition for a healthy democracy was emphasised. 
However, the choice to remain in or walk out of Parliament is a 
political decision made consciously by parliamentarians and their 
political parties. The decision being political in nature the Court 
cannot and does not sit in judgment over such matters. In any 
event, we have already held above that locus standi is not an 
impediment when the Court is exercising original jurisdiction. 
Therefore, to dismiss the instant petition solely on the ground that 
the petitioner did not object to the 2022 Amendments in the 
National Assembly would result in the Court deciding the question 
of maintainability on the basis of an irrelevant consideration. More 
so when we have already held above that the 2022 Amendments do 
raise questions of public importance having a bearing on the 
Fundamental Rights of the people of Pakistan.  
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
24
22.   
Learned counsel for the respondent Federation lastly 
took exception with the Court exercising its original jurisdiction in 
this matter instead of first letting the High Courts decide the vires 
of the 2022 Amendments. He relied on Manzoor Elahi Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1975 SC 66) and Benazir Bhutto 
Vs. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1988 SC 416) to reiterate that 
the Court’s original jurisdiction is to be exercised sparingly and in 
deference to the High Courts jurisdiction under Article 199 of the 
Constitution. We are of the view that the Court’s judgment in Suo 
Motu No.1 of 2023 dated 01.03.2023 has already dealt with this 
point. For reference, the relevant passage is produced below: 
“45. …Secondly, it appears that the petition 
under 
Article 
184(3) 
[Manzoor 
Elahi 
Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan] was the first of its kind 
before the Court under the present Constitution… 
The jurisprudence as regards Article 184(3) was 
thus quite literally in its infancy. In the half-
century that has since passed, things have of 
course changed enormously. The jurisprudence 
has matured, developed and deepened and the 
Court has developed an altogether more muscular 
approach in its understanding and application of 
Article 184(3). There has been a sea change in 
how the Court views this constitutional power. 
Thus, e.g., the observation of the learned Chief 
Justice, that “[t]his is an extraordinary power 
which should be used with circumspection” (pg. 
79) is, with respect, hardly reflective of present 
times. Time does not stand still and nor does the 
jurisprudence of the Court. In the common law 
tradition, the law is connected to the past but not 
shackled by it.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
We find ourselves in agreement with the dicta cited above and 
endorse it. Indeed, on an examination of the jurisprudence of the 
Court that has developed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution it 
becomes clear that since the decisions in Manzoor Elahi (supra) 
and Benazir Bhutto (supra) there have been numerous instances 
where the Court has considered and decided the vires of legislation 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
25
in its original jurisdiction. Some of these cases are Mehram Ali Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1998 SC 1445) which decided the 
vires of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997; Liaquat Hussain Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1999 SC 504) which decided the 
vires of the Pakistan Armed Forces (Acting in Aid of the Civil Power) 
Ordinance, 1998; Asfandyar Wali (supra) which decided the vires 
of the NAB Ordinance; Mobashir Hassan Vs. Federation of 
Pakistan (PLD 2010 SC 265) which decided the vires of the 
National Reconciliation Ordinance, 2007; Baz Muhammad Kakar 
Vs. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2012 SC 923) which decided the 
vires of the Contempt of Court Act, 2012; Zulfiqar Ahmed Bhutta 
Vs. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2018 SC 370) which decided the 
vires of Sections 203 and 232 of the Elections Act, 2017.  
23.   
In light of the above discussion, we find there to be no 
merit in the objections raised by the learned counsel for the 
respondent Federation in respect of the maintainability of the 
present Constitution Petition. As a result, his objections are 
rejected and the titled petition is declared to be maintainable 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. 
Impugned Provisions of the 2022 Amendments 
24.   
In his Constitution Petition the petitioner has sought 
the nullification of virtually the entire 2022 Amendments. However, 
on a careful examination of these we are not convinced that the 
Fundamental Rights of the people of Pakistan are violated by each 
and every section of the 2022 Amendments. Our considered view 
at the outset about the provisions of the 2022 Amendments is that 
prima facie judicial scrutiny of only Sections 2, 8, 10 and 14 of the 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
26
First Amendment and Sections 2, 3 and 14 of the Second 
Amendment is required. These provisions have brought about the 
following modifications in the NAB Ordinance: 
i. 
Section 3 of the Second Amendment has changed the 
definition of ‘offence’ in Section 5(o) of the NAB Ordinance by 
inserting a minimum pecuniary jurisdiction of Rs.500 million 
below which value the NAB cannot take cognizance of the 
offence of corruption and corrupt practices;  
ii. 
Section 2 of the First Amendment by inserting sub-sections 
(a)-(f) into Section 4 of the NAB Ordinance and Section 2 of 
the Second Amendment by adding sub-section (g) in Section 
4 of the NAB Ordinance has excluded certain holders of 
public office from application of the NAB Ordinance and 
thereby limited its effect; 
iii. 
Section 8 of the First Amendment has inserted new 
ingredients in the offence under Section 9(a)(v) of the NAB 
Ordinance and added explanations thereto. Section 9(a)(v) 
criminalizes the act of holding assets beyond means; 
iv. 
Section 10 of the First Amendment has deleted Section 14 of 
the NAB Ordinance which provides evidentiary presumptions 
that may be drawn against the accused; 
v. 
Section 14 of the First Amendment has deleted Section 21(g) 
of the NAB Ordinance which permitted foreign evidence to be 
admissible in legal proceedings under the mutual legal 
assistance regime; and 
vi. 
Section 14 of the Second Amendment has added a second 
proviso to Section 25(b) of the NAB Ordinance whereby an 
accused who enters into a plea bargain duly approved by the 
Accountability Court under Section 25(b) can renege from 
the same if he has not paid the full amount of the bargain 
settlement as approved by the Accountability Court. 
The remaining provisions of the 2022 Amendments may be 
considered later in an appropriate case. 
Section 3 of the Second Amendment 
25.   
As already noted above in para 6, Section 3 of the 
Second Amendment has amended Section 5(o) of the NAB 
Ordinance to set the minimum pecuniary jurisdiction of the NAB at 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
27
Rs.500 million for inquiring into and investigating cases involving 
the commission of the offence of corruption and corrupt practices. 
As a result, offences that cause loss valued at less than Rs.500 
million no longer come within the ambit of the NAB. The apparent 
rationale for enhancing the pecuniary jurisdiction is noted in the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons attached to the Second 
Amendment. It reads: 
“…Through 
the 
insertion 
of 
proposed 
amendments, the pecuniary jurisdiction of the 
NAB has been fixed to take only action against 
mega scandals…” 
(emphasis supplied) 
The necessity to streamline the jurisdiction of the NAB and focus 
its efforts on mega scandals i.e., those involving an amount of 
Rs.500 million or more was explained by learned counsel for the 
respondent Federation by reference to the jurisprudence of the 
Superior Courts. Reliance was placed on State Vs. Hanif Hyder 
(2016 SCMR 2031) wherein the Court observed: 
“2. During the hearing of these proceedings, we 
have noticed that the NAB in exercise of powers 
under section 9 of the NAB Ordinance has started 
taking cognizance of the petty matters and 
therefore, notice was issued to the D.G. NAB to 
submit report in regard to the enquiries and or 
investigations, which the NAB has undertaken in 
respect of the amounts involv[ing] less than 100 
Million and References, if any, filed which 
involved amount less than 100 million. A list has 
been provided. It is evident from this list that 
prima facie the enquiries and investigations 
undertaken by the NAB are not of mega scandals 
and apparently petty matters have been enquired 
into on the complaints. This is not the wisdom 
behind legislation of NAB Ordinance. The NAB 
Ordinance was primarily legislated to counter 
mega scandals and book the persons who are 
involved in mega scandals of corruption and 
corrupt practices.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
A decision by the Division Bench of the Sindh High Court reported 
as Amjad Hussain Vs. National Accountability Bureau (2017 
YLR 1) was also referred:  
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
28
“11. Learned PGA NAB on instructions from the 
Chairman NAB made written as well as oral 
submissions in order to assist the Court. He 
submitted that NAB was aware of this issue of 
pecuniary jurisdiction and in this respect had 
passed an SOP in respect of the monetary value 
of cases which NAB would pursue which is set 
out below for ease of reference. 
“Priority for Cognizance of Cases:  
… 
iii. Cases of former/sitting legislators of 
National Assembly, Senate and Provincial 
Assemblies (including ministers/advisers 
etc.) and elected representatives of local 
bodies, where amount involved is more 
than Rs.100 million. 
iv. Cases involving interest of members of 
public at large where the numbers of 
defrauded person are more than 50 
persons and amount involved is not less 
than Rs.100 million. 
v. Cases against public servants, whether 
serving or retired, Bankers, Businessmen 
and Contractors where amount involved is 
more than Rs.100 million. 
… 
40. …taking into account the above discussion on 
the pecuniary jurisdiction of NAB including NAB 
making the best use of its human resources, 
equipment, 
office 
space 
etc., 
and 
budget 
limitations we hereby endorse by way of judicial 
order the NAB's SOP for dealing with pecuniary 
jurisdiction which is set out at para 11 of this 
order… as we consider the figure of Rs.100 M to 
be significantly large to justify the intervention of 
the NAB being the premier anti corruption body 
in the Country…” 
(emphasis supplied) 
The above dictum of the Sindh High Court was endorsed by the 
Islamabad High Court in Iftikhar Ali Haideri Vs. National 
Accountability Bureau (2019 YLR 255).  
26.   
It becomes clear from the pronouncements of the 
Superior Courts quoted above that the principal focus of the NAB 
is to mainly prosecute mega scandals. But whilst the judgments of 
the Superior Courts indicate that the minimum pecuniary 
threshold of NAB should be Rs.100 million (except in limited 
circumstances where offences less than Rs.100 million cannot be 
prosecuted by any other accountability agency), Section 3 of the 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
29
Second Amendment has increased this minimum threshold to 
Rs.500 million. No cogent argument was put forward by learned 
counsel for the respondent Federation as to why Parliament has 
fixed a higher amount of Rs.500 million for the NAB to entertain 
complaints and file corresponding references in the Accountability 
Courts when the Superior Courts have termed acts of corruption 
and corrupt practices causing loss to the tune of Rs.100 million as 
mega scandals.  
27.   
It is accepted that Parliament is empowered to legislate 
freely within its legislative competence laid down by the 
Constitution. However, it is also a settled principle of our 
constitutional dispensation that the three organs of the State i.e., 
the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary perform distinct 
functions and that one organ of the State cannot encroach into the 
jurisdiction of another organ. Reliance is placed on the case of 
Mobashir Hassan (supra): 
“34. … It is also to be borne in mind that 
Constitution envisages the trichotomy of powers 
amongst three organs of the State, namely the 
legislature, executive and the judiciary. The 
legislature is assigned the task of law making, the 
executive to execute such law and the judiciary to 
interpret the laws. None of the organs of the State 
can encroach upon the field of the others…” 
(emphasis supplied) 
Nonetheless, by enacting Section 3 of the Second Amendment we 
are afraid that Parliament has in fact assumed the powers of the 
Judiciary because by excluding from the ambit of the NAB 
Ordinance the holders of public office who have allegedly 
committed the offence of corruption and corrupt practices involving 
an amount of less than Rs.500 million Parliament has effectively 
absolved them from any liability for their acts. This is a function 
which under the Constitution only the Judiciary can perform (with 
the exception of the President who has been conferred the power to 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
30
grant a pardon under Article 45 of the Constitution). A similar view 
was also taken by the Court in Mobashir Hassan (supra) when it 
was examining the vires of Section 7 of the National Reconciliation 
Ordinance, 2007 under which pending investigations and 
proceedings initiated by the NAB against holders of public office 
were withdrawn and terminated with immediate effect:  
“119. So far as withdrawal from the cases inside 
or outside the country, as per Section 33[A] of the 
NAO, 1999, inserted through Section 7 of the 
NRO, 2007, is concerned, it would mean that the 
‘holders of public office’ have been absolved from 
the charge of corruption and corrupt practices, 
therefore, by adopting such procedure, the 
legislative 
authority 
had 
transgressed 
its 
jurisdiction, because such powers are only 
available to the judiciary and the Constitution 
provides guarantee to secure the independence of 
the judiciary...” 
(emphasis supplied) 
28.   
Learned 
counsel 
for 
the 
respondent 
Federation 
attempted to justify this encroachment into the jurisdiction of the 
Judiciary by submitting that merely because the minimum 
pecuniary threshold of the NAB has been increased does not mean 
that holders of public office stand absolved. That other 
accountability fora exist in the country where the trials of the 
accused holders of public office who have been removed from the 
jurisdiction of the NAB can be held. The Court having regard to the 
fact, as noted above in para 2, that holders of public office under 
the NAB Ordinance fall into two categories i.e., elected holders of 
public office and persons in the service of Pakistan, posed the 
following query to learned counsel for the respondent Federation ‘if 
the Accountability Court were to send/transfer a Reference against 
a parliamentarian [elected holders of public office] for lack of its 
jurisdiction, then which would be the competent transferee court to 
adjudicate the Reference and under which law?’ In his written 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
31
response, the learned counsel referred to the provisions of 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (“1947 Act”); Pakistan Penal 
Code, 1860 (“PPC”); Income Tax Ordinance, 2001; and Anti-Money 
Laundering Act, 2010. For present purposes the two relevant laws 
are the 1947 Act and the PPC. However, on a careful examination 
of these legislations it becomes clear that the two are applicable 
only to public servants. Public servant is defined in the PPC in 
Section 21 as follows: 
“21. “Public servant”.- The words “public 
servant” denote a person falling under any of the 
descriptions hereinafter following, namely:—  
 
Second.- Every Commissioned Officer in the 
Military, Naval or Air Forces of Pakistan while 
serving under the Federal Government or any 
Provincial Government; 
 
Third.- Every Judge; 
 
Fourth.- Every officer of a Court of Justice whose 
duty it is, as such officer, to investigate or report 
on any matter of law or fact, or to make, 
authenticate, or keep any document, or to take 
charge or dispose of any property, or to execute 
any judicial process, or to administer any oath, or 
to interpret, or to preserve order in the Court; and 
every person specially authorized by a Court of 
Justice to perform any of such duties; 
 
Fifth.- Every juryman, assessor, or member of a 
panchayat assisting a Court of Justice or public 
servant; 
 
Sixth.- Every arbitrator or other person to whom 
any cause or matter has been referred for 
decision or report by any Court of Justice, or by 
any other competent public authority; 
 
Seventh.- Every person who holds any office by 
virtue of which he is empowered to place or keep 
any person in confinement; 
 
Eighth.- Every officer of the Government whose 
duty it is, as such officer, to prevent offences, to 
give information of offences, to bring offenders to 
justice, or to protect the public health, safety or 
convenience; 
 
Ninth.- Every officer whose duty it is, as such 
officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any 
property on behalf of the Government, or to make 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
32
any survey, assessment or contract on behalf of 
the Government, or to execute any revenue-
process, or to investigate, or to report, on any 
matter affecting the pecuniary interests of the 
Government, or to make, authenticate or keep 
any document relating to the pecuniary interests 
of the Government, or to prevent the infraction of 
any law for the protection of the pecuniary 
interests of the Government, and every officer in 
the service or pay of the Government or 
remunerated by fees or commission for the 
performance of any public duty; 
Tenth.- Every officer whose duty it is, as such 
officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any 
property, to make any survey or assessment or to 
levy any rate or tax for any secular common 
purpose of any village, town or district, or to 
make, authenticate or keep any document for the 
ascertaining of the rights of the people of any 
village, town or district; 
Eleventh.- Every person who holds any office in 
virtue of which he is empowered to prepare, 
publish, maintain or revise an electoral roll or to 
conduct an election or part of an election.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
Section 2 of the 1947 Act also relies on Section 21 of the PPC to 
define public servant. Therefore, in both laws the term ‘public 
servant’ has an identical meaning.   
29.   
One example of public servants is given in Article 260 
of the Constitution: 
“260. Definitions. (1) In the Constitution, unless 
the context otherwise requires, the following 
expressions have the meaning hereby respectively 
assigned to them, that is to say,- 
… 
“service of Pakistan” means any service, post or 
office in connection with the affairs of the 
Federation or of a Province, and includes an All-
Pakistan Service, service in the Armed Forces and 
any other service declared to be a service of 
Pakistan by or under Act of [Majlis-e-Shoora 
(Parliament)] or of a Provincial Assembly, but does 
not include service as… member of a House or a 
Provincial Assembly;” 
(emphasis supplied) 
It may be noticed that under the Constitution persons in the 
service of Pakistan are those who are holding posts in connection 
with the affairs of the Federation or Province. As a result, such 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
33
persons 
are 
either 
dealing 
with 
the 
property 
of 
the 
Federal/Provincial Government or with the pecuniary interests of 
the Federal/Provincial Government. They, therefore, come within 
the definition of public servant set out in the PPC and adopted by 
the 1947 Act and so can be prosecuted under these laws for the 
offence of corruption and corrupt practices. However, elected 
holders of public office do not qualify as public servants under the 
guise of being in the service of Pakistan because Article 260 of the 
Constitution specifically excludes them from such service. Further, 
although no authoritative pronouncement has been delivered in 
this respect by the Superior Courts of Pakistan, the Indian 
Supreme Court in R.S. Nayak Vs. A.R. Antulay (AIR 1984 SC 684) 
has categorically held that members of the Legislative Assembly 
(equivalent to our elected holders of public office) are not public 
servants within the meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (which is similar to Section 21 of the PPC).1 Further 
the Bangladesh Supreme Court in Zakir Hossain Sarkar Vs. State 
[70 DLR (2018) 203] has noted that a Member of Parliament 
(equivalent to our elected holders of public office) is not a public 
servant because he is neither appointed by the Government nor 
paid by it and he does not discharge his constitutional duties of 
law-making in accordance with the rules and regulations made by 
the Executive (para 23 of that judgment). The result is that 
contrary to what learned counsel for the respondent Federation 
has submitted elected holders of public office are not triable either 
under the 1947 Act or the PPC for the offence of corruption and 
corrupt practices.  
30.   
This legal situation also explains why the Holders of 
Representative Offices (Prevention of Misconduct) Act, 1976 (“1976 
                                                
1 Later case-law from the Indian jurisdiction has included Members of the Legislative Assembly in 
the definition of public servant but the said case-law does not pertain Section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 as the law in India changed in 1988.  
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
34
Act”) was enacted and Holders of Representative Offices 
(Punishment for Misconduct) Order, 1977 (“1977 Order”) was 
promulgated. Both these laws applied only to holders of 
representative office i.e., elected holders of public office and  
subjected them to prosecution for offences similar to those 
prescribed in the NAB Ordinance. If the submission of learned 
counsel for the respondent Federation is correct that elected 
holders of public office can be tried under the 1947 Act and the 
PPC then there would have been no need to pass the 1976 Act or 
the 1977 Order since both the 1947 Act and the PPC precede these 
laws. Ultimately, the 1976 Act was repealed by the Parliament and 
Provincial 
Assemblies 
(Disqualification 
for 
Membership) 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1990 whereas the 1977 Order was 
repealed by the Ehtesab Act, 1997. As noted above in para 2, the 
Ehtesab Act, 1997 was the predecessor of the NAB Ordinance and 
the latter repealed the former. This chain of legislative events 
shows that in 1976 Parliament became aware of the vacuum in the 
law whereby persons in the service of Pakistan could be held to 
account for their corruption and corrupt practices but elected 
holders of public office could not. Therefore, Parliament passed the 
1976 Act. The said Act was then succeeded by multiple legislations 
which had the same object i.e., accountability of elected holders of 
public office with the NAB Ordinance being the latest and the most 
comprehensive effort so far to accomplish this objective.  
31.   
By amending Section 5(o) of the NAB Ordinance to 
raise the minimum pecuniary threshold of the NAB to Rs.500 
million, Section 3 of the Second Amendment has undone the 
legislative efforts beginning in 1976 to bring elected holders of 
public office within the ambit of accountability laws because by 
virtue of Section 3 elected holders of public office have been 
granted both retrospective and prospective exemption from 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
35
accountability laws. Once excluded from the jurisdiction of the 
NAB no other accountability fora can take cognizance of their 
alleged acts of corruption and corrupt practices as noted above. 
Such blanket immunity offends Articles 9, 14, 23 and 24 of the 
Constitution because it permits and encourages the squandering of 
public assets and wealth by elected holders of public office as there 
is no forum for their accountability. This in turn affects the 
economic well-being of the State and ultimately the quality and 
dignity of the peoples lives because as more resources are diverted 
towards illegal activities less resources remain for the provision of 
essential services to the people such as health facilities, education 
institutes and basic infrastructure etc. The immunity also negates 
Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitution which mandates that only 
‘sagacious, righteous, non-profligate, honest and ameen’ persons 
enter Parliament. It also offends the equal treatment command of 
Article 25 of the Constitution as differential treatment is being 
meted out to persons in the service of Pakistan than to elected 
holders of public office. This is because persons in the service of 
Pakistan can still be prosecuted for the offence of corruption and 
corrupt practices under the 1947 Act as they fall within the 
definition of public servants (refer para 29 above). The 1947 Act 
shares some of the essential features of the NAB Ordinance, 
namely, it provides for the prosecution of public servants who have 
accumulated assets beyond means [refer Section 5(1)(e) of the 1947 
Act] and it permits the drawing of an evidentiary presumption 
against 
public 
servants 
who 
cannot 
account 
for 
their 
disproportionate pecuniary resources or property [refer Section 5(3) 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
36
of the 1947 Act]. Consequently, if Section 3 of the Second 
Amendment is allowed to remain on the statute book there will be 
an anomalous situation in that elected holders of public office will 
be exempted from accountability under the amended and much 
relaxed requirements of the NAB Ordinance even though they 
‘while acting as trustees and the chosen representatives of the 
people, take decisions which are often of grave consequence for the 
protection of the economic, political and over-all national interests of 
the people of Pakistan. In other words, theirs is a fiduciary duty of 
the highest order’ [ref: Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi Vs. Federation of 
Pakistan (PLD 2012 SC 1089) at para 6 of Justice Jawwad S. 
Khawaja’s concurring note] whilst the persons in the service of 
Pakistan will have to undergo the rigours of accountability laws 
without exception. Such a situation cannot be countenanced by 
either the Constitution or the law.  
32.   
In this regard, we must also note that the learned 
counsel for the respondent Federation filed his concise statement 
on 12.09.2023 wherein he has attached the decision/guideline of 
the Chairman NAB dated 08.08.2023 in respect of returned 
references. The decision/guideline reads: 
“Therefore, a policy/decision has been made by 
the competent authority that all References which 
have been returned to NAB shall now be placed 
before the Accountability Courts by filing an 
application pleading this amendment as per case 
law laid down in the judgment Adam Amin 
Chaudhry Vs NAB in W.P. No.3787/2022 and 
requesting that the Reference be revived and re-
examined, the viewpoint of the NAB be solicited 
and thereafter it be forwarded in terms of section 
4(4)(d) 
of 
the 
National 
Accountability 
(Amendment) Act, 2023 to the appropriate 
forum.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
37
We have already noted above in para 6 that the 2023 Act has 
provided 
a 
mechanism 
for 
transferring 
pending 
inquiries, 
investigations and references to the relevant agency, authority, 
department, court, tribunal or forum if the NAB or Accountability 
Courts are seized of these matters. But returned references can by 
no stretch of the imagination be considered as pending before the 
Accountability Courts. Therefore, the above decision/guideline 
issued by Chairman NAB a year after the First Amendment to seek 
the revival of the 544 references returned to the NAB that are lying 
in storage to have them forwarded to the appropriate forum cannot 
vest jurisdiction in the Accountability Courts to reopen cases of 
which it is not seized. In any event, the decision/guideline still 
does not resolve the pivotal issue i.e., that there is neither an 
accountability law other than the NAB Ordinance and an 
investigating authority other than the NAB nor any accountability 
forum other than the Accountability Court where the acts of 
corruption and corrupt practices committed by elected holders of 
public 
office 
can 
be 
investigated 
and 
prosecuted. 
The 
decision/guideline may therefore prove effective only in cases of 
corruption and corrupt practices where the accused are persons in 
the service of Pakistan. Consequently, the decision/guideline 
issued by Chairman NAB has no bearing on the vires of Section 3 
of the Second Amendment which is unconstitutional on account of 
absolving persons accused of the offence of corruption and corrupt 
practices without a judicial verdict which amounts to legislative 
judgment [refer Province of Punjab Vs. National Industrial 
Cooperative Credit Corporation (2000 SCMR 567) at para 8]. 
Declaration on Section 3 of the Second Amendment 
A. Elected Holders of Public Office  
i. 
On account of our analysis noted above in paras 27-
32, Section 3 of the Second Amendment is declared to 
be ultra vires the Constitution and of no legal effect 
from the date of commencement of the Second 
Amendment.  
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
38
B. Persons in the Service of Pakistan 
ii. 
The cases of persons in the service of Pakistan can be 
categorised under two headings, namely, offences 
which are common to both the 1947 Act and the NAB 
Ordinance and offences which are unique to the NAB 
Ordinance.  
iii. 
The offences which are common to the 1947 Act and 
the NAB Ordinance are those listed in Section 9(a)(i)-(v) 
of the NAB Ordinance whereas the offences in 9(a)(vi)-
(xii) are distinct to the NAB Ordinance. 
iv. 
Since persons in the service of Pakistan can be tried 
for offences contained in Section 9(a)(i)-(v) of the NAB 
Ordinance under the 1947 Act the bar of Rs.500 
million shall continue for such offences. To this extent 
Section 3 of the Second Amendment is declared to be 
intra vires the Constitution. 
v. 
However, on account of the fact that persons in the 
service of Pakistan cannot be tried for the offences 
noted in Section 9(a)(vi)-(xii) under the 1947 Act or any 
other accountability law the bar of Rs.500 million will 
not apply to them for such offences. Section 3 of the 
Second Amendment is therefore declared to be void 
and without legal effect for these offences for 
discharging the accused without trial which is 
tantamount to legislative judgment and is held to be so 
from the date of commencement of the Second 
Amendment.  
Section 2 of the 2022 Amendments 
33.   
Section 2 of the 2022 Amendments has altered Section 
4 of the NAB Ordinance. For reference Section 4, as amended by 
the 2022 Amendments, is produced below: 
“4. Application: (1) This Ordinance extends to 
the whole of Pakistan and shall apply to all 
persons, including those persons who are or have 
been in the service of Pakistan, except persons 
and transactions specified in sub-section (2). 
 
(2) The provisions of this Ordinance shall not be 
applicable 
to 
the 
following 
persons 
or 
transactions, namely:-  
 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
39
(a) all matters pertaining to Federal, Provincial or 
Local taxation, other levies or imposts, including 
refunds, or loss of exchequer pertaining to 
taxation, transactions or amounts duly covered 
by amnesty schemes of Government of Pakistan;  
 
(b) decisions of Federal or Provincial Cabinet, 
their Committees or Sub-Committees, Council of 
Common Interests (CCI), National Economic 
Council (NEC), National Finance Commission 
(NFC), Executive Committee of the National 
Economic Council (ECNEC), Central Development 
Working Party (CDWP), Provincial Development 
Working 
Party 
(PDWP), 
Departmental 
Development Working Party (DDWP), Board of 
Directors of State Owned Enterprises (SOEs), 
Board of Trustees/Directors of all Statutory 
Bodies, the State Bank of Pakistan and such 
other bodies except where the holder of the public 
office has received a monetary gain as a result of 
such decision;  
 
(c) any person or entity who, or transaction in 
relation thereto, which are not directly or 
indirectly connected with the holder of a public 
office except offences falling under clauses (ix), (x) 
and (xi) of sub-section (a) of section 9;  
 
(d) procedural lapses in performance of any 
public or governmental work or function, project 
or scheme, unless there is evidence to prove that 
a holder of public office or any other person 
acting on his behalf has been conferred or has 
received any monetary or other material benefit 
from that particular public or governmental work 
or function, whether directly or indirectly on 
account of such procedural lapses, which the 
said recipient was otherwise not entitled to 
receive;  
 
(e) a decision taken, an advice, report or opinion 
rendered or given by a public office holder or any 
other person in the course of his duty, unless 
there is sufficient evidence to show that the 
holder of public office or any other person acting 
on his behalf received or gained any monetary or 
other material benefit, from that decision, advice, 
report or opinion, whether directly or indirectly, 
which the said recipient was otherwise not 
entitled to receive;  
 
(f) all matters, which have been decided by, or fall 
within the jurisdiction of a regulatory body 
established under a Federal or Provincial law; and 
 
(g) all matters where the funds, property or 
interest not involving or belonging to the 
appropriate government, except for the offences 
under clauses (ix), (x) or (xi) of sub-section (a) of 
section 9.” 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
40
Prior to the 2022 Amendments Section 4 of the NAB Ordinance 
read: 
“4. Application: It extends to the whole of 
Pakistan and shall apply to all persons in 
Pakistan, all citizens of Pakistan and persons who 
are or have been in the service of Pakistan 
wherever they may be, including areas which are 
part of Federally and Provincially Administered 
Tribal Areas.” 
34.   
From the comparison of the unamended and amended 
versions of Section 4 it becomes plain that exceptions have been 
created for the decisions, advice, reports, opinions of and works, 
functions, projects, schemes undertaken by holders of public office 
and public/governmental bodies unless there is evidence of the 
holder of public officer or a person acting on his behalf having 
received monetary or other material benefit. Such exceptions are 
novel not only to the NAB Ordinance but also other accountability 
laws such as the 1947 Act. The rationale behind introducing these 
exceptions in the NAB Ordinance is explained in the Statement of 
Objects and Reasons attached to the First Amendment: 
“Currently National Accountability Bureau (NAB) 
is dealing with a large number of inquiries and 
investigation in addition to handling mega 
corruption cases. Under the existing regime a 
number of inquiries have been initiated against 
the holders of Public Office and government 
servants on account of procedural lapses where 
no actual corruption is involved. This has 
enhanced NAB’s burden and had an adverse 
impact 
on 
the 
workings 
of 
the 
Federal 
Government. Additionally, NAB has also assumed 
parallel jurisdiction and is inquiring into matters 
pertaining to taxation, imposition of levies etc., 
and therefore interfering in the domain of tax 
regulatory 
bodies. 
As 
such, 
a 
number 
of 
amendments have been proposed to redefine the 
operational domain of NAB.” 
The Court appreciates the efforts of Parliament to address and 
rectify what has long been regarded unguided discretion of the 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
41
NAB authorities. The Court as far back in Asfandyar Wali (supra) 
observed in relation to the NAB Ordinance that: 
“228. …To protect decision making level officers 
and the officers conducting inquiry/investigation 
from any threats, appropriate measures must be 
taken to relieve them of the anxiety from the 
likelihood of harassment for taking honest 
decisions. 
 
229. Viewed in the above context, although 
shifting of burden of proof on an accused in terms 
of Section 9(a)(vi)(vii) read with Section 14(d) may 
not be bad in law in its present form, but would 
certainly be counter productive in relation to the 
principle of good governance. If decision making 
level officials responsible for issuing orders, SROs 
etc. are not protected for performing their official 
acts in good faith, the public servants and all 
such officers at the level of decision making 
would be reluctant to take decisions and/or avoid 
or prolong the same on one pretext or another 
which would ultimately lead to paralysis of State-
machinery. Such 
a 
course 
cannot 
be 
countenanced by this Court.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
35.   
Clearly then Section 2 of the 2022 Amendments is an 
attempt by Parliament to rein in the unguided powers of the NAB 
and to protect the bureaucracy from unnecessary harassment. 
However, the exceptions granted by Section 2 operate as an en-
masse exemption for holders of public office from facing 
accountability. The freshly inserted condition that the NAB shall 
provide evidence of monetary or other material benefit received by 
the holder of public office or a person acting on his behalf to 
overcome the exceptions listed in Section 2 of the 2022 
Amendments cannot be satisfied in the references already pending 
before the Accountability Courts. Therefore, where such condition 
will not be met by the NAB the result will be (and in fact has been) 
that references will be returned.  In this regard, our analysis set 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
42
out above in paras 27-32 being highly relevant is adopted because 
Section 2 of the 2022 Amendments affects the same Fundamental 
Rights i.e., Articles 9, 14, 23 24 and raises the same problems in 
terms of the accountability of elected holders of public office as 
Section 3 of the Second Amendment, namely, that whilst persons 
in the service of Pakistan may still be investigated and prosecuted 
under the 1947 Act for the offences listed in Section 9(a)(i)-(v) of 
the NAB Ordinance, elected holders of public office will not be 
amenable to the jurisdiction of any other accountability fora for the 
offence of corruption and corrupt practices.  
Declaration on Section 2 of the 2022 Amendments  
A. Elected Holders of Public Office  
i. 
For suffering from the same defects as noted above in 
paras 27-32, Section 2 of the 2022 Amendments is 
also 
declared 
to 
be 
void 
from 
the 
date 
of 
commencement of the 2022 Amendments.  
B. Persons in the Service of Pakistan 
ii. 
Section 2 of the 2022 Amendments insofar as these 
pertain to the offences set out in Section 9(a)(i)-(v) of 
the NAB Ordinance are declared to be intra vires the 
Constitution because persons in the service of 
Pakistan can be prosecuted for these offences under 
the 1947 Act.  
iii. 
However, Section 2 is ultra vires the Constitution from 
the date of commencement of the 2022 Amendments 
for the offences listed in Section 9(a)(vi)-(xii) because 
persons in the service of Pakistan cannot be tried for 
such offences under the 1947 Act or any other 
accountability law.  
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
43
Sections 8 and 10 of the First Amendment 
36.   
Section 8 of the First Amendment has significantly 
altered Section 9 of the NAB Ordinance which lays down various 
categories of the offence of corruption and corrupt practices. For 
present purposes, the changes brought about in Section 9(a)(v) of 
the NAB Ordinance are relevant. The Section as it existed prior to 
and after the First Amendment is produced below: 
“Prior to the First Amendment 
9. Corruption and Corrupt Practices: (a) A 
holder of a public office, or any other person, is 
said to commit or to have committed the offence 
of corruption and corrupt practices— 
… 
(v) if he or any of his dependents or benamidars 
owns, possesses, or has acquired right or title in 
any assets or holds irrevocable power of attorney 
in respect of any assets or pecuniary resources 
disproportionate to his known sources of income, 
which he cannot reasonably account for or 
maintains a standard of living beyond that which 
is commensurate with his sources of income; 
 
After the First Amendment 
9. Corruption and Corrupt Practices: (a) A 
holder of a public office, or any other person, is 
said to commit or to have committed the offence 
of corruption and corrupt practices— 
… 
(v) if he or any of his dependents or other 
benamidars, through corrupt and dishonest 
means, owns, possesses or acquires rights or title 
in assets substantially disproportionate to his 
known sources of income which he cannot 
reasonably account for.  
      Explanation I.– The valuation of immovable 
property shall be reckoned on the date of 
purchase either according to the actual price 
shown in the relevant title documents or the 
applicable rates prescribed by District Collector 
or the Federal Board of Revenue whichever is 
higher. No evidence contrary to the later shall be 
admissible.  
      Explanation 
II.– 
For 
the 
purpose 
of 
calculation of movable assets, the sum total of 
credit entries of bank account shall not be treated 
as an asset. Bank balance of an account on the 
date of initiation of inquiry may be treated as a 
movable asset. A banking transaction shall not be 
treated as an asset unless there is evidence of 
creation of corresponding asset through that 
transaction.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
44
37.   
It may be noticed from the above that apart from 
reducing the circumstances in which the offence of assets beyond 
means can be made out against the holder of a public office, the 
First Amendment has made another material change in Section 
9(a)(v), namely, the obligation on the NAB to prove that an accused 
has accumulated substantially disproportionate assets ‘through 
corrupt and dishonest means.’ This element was previously not a 
part of Section 9(a)(v). This is evident from the ingredients of 
Section 9(a)(v) which were well-established in the jurisprudence of 
the Court and required that the NAB prove that: 
i. 
The accused is a holder of public office; 
ii. 
The nature and extent of the pecuniary resources of the 
property found in the accused’s possession; 
iii. 
The known sources of income of the accused; and 
iv. 
The resources or property found in the possession of the 
accused are objectively disproportionate to his known 
sources of income [ref: Muhammad Hashim Babar Vs. State 
(2010 SCMR 1697) at para 4].  
Once the NAB had established the above-mentioned four elements 
the accused was presumed to be guilty of the offence of corruption 
and corrupt practices unless he could account for the resources or 
property so recovered from him. The NAB was not required to 
demonstrate that the accused had obtained the resources or 
property ‘through corrupt and dishonest means’ because the mere 
presence of disproportionate assets led to the presumption that the 
accused had engaged in corrupt and dishonest conduct. Such a 
presumption is provided in Section 14(c) of the NAB Ordinance. 
The fact of the matter is that the proof of acquisition of assets 
‘through corrupt and dishonest means’ itself constitutes a 
complete offence. Therefore, by changing Section 9(a)(v) the First 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
45
Amendment has amalgamated two separate offences into one. As a 
result, the original offence contained in Section 9(a)(v) has now 
been rendered redundant. To further ensure the futility of the said 
offence all of the evidentiary presumptions contained in Section 14 
of the NAB Ordinance sustaining the erstwhile offence under 
Section 9(a)(v) and the remaining offences in the NAB Ordinance 
have been omitted by Section 10 of the First Amendment. The 
presumption relevant to Section 9(a)(v) of the Ordinance existed in 
Section 14(c). This latter provision read:  
“14. Presumption against accused accepting 
illegal gratification: … 
c. In any trial, of an offence punishable under 
clause (v) of sub-section (a) of section 9 of this 
Ordinance, the fact that the accused person or 
any other person on his behalf, is in possession, 
for 
which 
the 
accused 
person 
cannot 
satisfactorily account, of assets or pecuniary 
resources disproportionate to his known source of 
income, or that such person has, at or about the 
time of the commission of the, offence with which 
he is charged, obtained an accretion to his 
pecuniary resources or property for which he 
cannot satisfactorily account, the Court shall 
presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the 
accused person is guilty of the offence of 
corruption 
and 
corrupt 
practices 
and 
his 
conviction therefor shall not be invalid by reason 
only 
that 
it 
is 
based 
solely 
on 
such 
a 
presumption.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
38.   
Further, by the insertion of Explanation II to Section 
9(a)(v) entries in bank statements have been removed from the 
scope of assets whereas banking transactions can only be regarded 
as assets if there is evidence of the creation of a corresponding 
asset through specific transactions. The source, object and 
quantum of credits/receipts in the bank accounts can now no 
longer be shown for proving the creation of assets. Nor can debit 
transfers from one account to another be used to show 
accumulation of money for the creation of an asset. It goes without 
saying that bank records are usually the most pivotal evidence in 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
46
financial crimes. However, by virtue of Explanation II limited resort 
can be made to them. On a first reading, the changes to Section 
9(a)(v), the addition of Explanation II and the omission of Section 
14(c) might appear innocuous in nature but their effect both 
individually and collectively has actually rendered the offence of 
corruption and corrupt practices in the category of assets beyond 
means pointless. If accused persons cannot be held to account for 
owning or possessing assets beyond their means, the natural 
corollary will be that public assets and wealth will become 
irrecoverable which would encourage further corruption. This will 
have a direct adverse effect on the peoples’ right to life and to 
public property because the economic well-being of the State will 
be prejudiced.  
39.   
Additionally, when other accountability laws are 
examined in this context such as the 1947 Act, it become obvious 
that no similar or corresponding changes have been made in that 
Act in relation to the offence of assets beyond means. The relevant 
provisions from the 1947 Act are produced below for reference: 
“5. Criminal Misconduct. – (1) A public servant 
is said to commit the offence of criminal 
misconduct: 
… 
(e) If he, or any of his dependents, is in 
possession, for which the public servant cannot 
reasonably account of pecuniary resources or of 
property disproportionate to his known sources of 
income. 
… 
(3) In any trial of an offence punishable under 
sub-section (2) the fact that the accused person 
or any other person on his behalf is in 
possession, for which the accused person cannot 
satisfactorily account, of pecuniary resources or 
property disproportionate to his known sources of 
income may be proved, and on such proof the 
Court shall presume unless the contrary is 
proved, that the accused person is guilty of 
criminal misconduct and his conviction therefore 
shall not be invalid by reason only that it is based 
solely on such presumption.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
47
We have already held above in paras 29 and 31 that persons who 
are in the service of Pakistan can still be tried under the 1947 Act 
for the offence of corruption and corrupt practices even if they 
stand excluded from the jurisdiction of the NAB pursuant to the 
amendments made in Section 4 of the NAB Ordinance. However, 
the same cannot be said of elected holders of public office because 
they only fall within the purview of the NAB Ordinance. The 
amended Section 9(a)(v) and the omission of Section 14(c) would 
treat similarly placed persons differently because while elected 
holders of public office are relieved from prosecution for the offence 
under Section 9(a)(v), persons in the service of Pakistan will still 
have to go through the rigors of trial under the 1947 Act for the 
same offence. This would offend the equal treatment command of 
Article 25 of the Constitution. Insofar as the other presumptions 
contained in Section 14 of the NAB Ordinance for the other 
categories listed in Section 9(a) ibid are concerned, the same too 
stand revived as their omission will prevent the recovery of public 
assets and wealth from the holders of public office thereby 
defeating the peoples Fundamental Rights of accessing justice and 
protecting their public property. Moreso, when presumptions 
comparable to those in Section 14(a) [presumption as to motive] 
and (d) [presumption as to guilt] for the categories of ‘illegal 
gratification,’ ‘obtaining a valuable thing without consideration,’ 
‘fraudulent 
misappropriation,’ 
‘obtaining 
property/valuable 
thing/pecuniary advantage through illegal means’ and ‘misuse of 
authority’ do not exist in any other accountability law, including 
the 1947 Act.  
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
48
Declaration on Sections 8 and 10 of the First Amendment 
A. Elected Holders of Public Office 
i. 
For the foregoing reasons the phrase ‘through corrupt 
and dishonest means’ used in Section 9(a)(v) along 
with its Explanation II is struck down from the NAB 
Ordinance from the date of commencement of the First 
Amendment 
for 
being 
unworkable. 
Additionally, 
Section 14 in its entirety is restored to the NAB 
Ordinance from the date of commencement of the First 
Amendment. 
Sections 
8 
and 
10 
of 
the 
First 
Amendment are declared invalid to this extent.  
B. Persons in the Service of Pakistan 
ii. 
The amendments made in Section 9(a)(v) of the NAB 
Ordinance by Section 8 of the First Amendment are 
upheld in their entirety as persons in the service of 
Pakistan can be tried for the same offence under the 
1947 Act.  
iii. 
However, Section 10 of the First Amendment is struck 
down from the date of commencement of the First 
Amendment and Section 14(a), (b) and (d) stand 
restored 
to 
the 
NAB 
Ordinance 
because 
such 
presumptions do not exist in any other accountability 
law.  
Section 14 of the First Amendment  
40.   
Section 14 of the First Amendment has omitted 
Section 21(g) of the NAB Ordinance. This provision provided that: 
“21. International Cooperation Request for 
mutual legal assistance: The Chairman NAB or 
any officer authorized by the Federal Government 
may request a Foreign State to do any or all of the 
following acts in accordance with the law of such 
State:— 
… 
(g) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Qanun-e-Shahadat Order 1984 (P.O. 10 of 1984) 
or any other law for the time being in force all 
evidence, documents or any other material 
transferred to Pakistan by a Foreign Government 
shall 
be 
receivable 
as 
evidence 
in 
legal 
proceedings under this Ordinance;” 
The primary objective of Section 21(g) in particular and Section 21 
in general was explained by the Court in Mobashir Hassan (supra):  
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
49
“99. …A perusal of above Section [21] indicates 
that on account of international cooperation, 
request for mutual legal assistance means, the 
NAB or any officer, authorized by the Federal 
Government, has been empowered to make a 
request to a Foreign State to do any or all things 
mentioned therein… for achieving the object to 
save the assets outside the country, allegedly 
belonging to the nation, a mechanism has been 
provided 
on 
the 
basis 
of 
international 
cooperation. 
… 
104. The Government of Pakistan is also 
signatory to the above UN Convention [against 
Corruption] as it has been ratified by Pakistan on 
31st 
August, 
2007, 
regarding 
international 
cooperation in criminal matters in accordance 
with Articles 44 to 50 of the above noted UN 
Convention, 
according 
to 
which, 
where 
appropriate and consistent with their domestic 
legal system, the State Parties shall consider 
assisting 
each 
other 
in 
investigation 
or 
proceedings in civil and administrative matters, 
relating to corruption. 
… 
129. 
Section 
21 
of the 
NAO, 1999 is a 
comprehensive provision of law, which spells out 
the nature of the request to a Foreign State for 
mutual legal assistance... We believe that to curb 
the culture of corruption and corrupt practices 
globally it has become necessary to enact such 
law on the basis of which the objects noted 
hereinabove could be achieved. 
 
130. …A perusal of UN Convention Against 
Corruption indicates that… State parties shall 
consider assisting each other in investigations of 
and proceedings in civil and administrative 
matters relating to corruption; as well as 
affording to one another the widest measure of 
mutual 
legal 
assistance 
in 
investigations, 
prosecutions, and judicial proceedings in relation 
to the offences covered by the Convention; 
prevention and detection of transfers of proceeds 
of crime. On the other hand, the promulgation of 
the NRO, 2007, instead of preventing corruption 
and corrupt practices, has encouraged the 
same...” 
(emphasis supplied) 
41.   
It is a common fact that many accused persons being 
tried under the NAB Ordinance have stashed their wealth and 
assets abroad in tax havens under fiduciary instruments. However, 
after the omission of the said provision the admissibility of foreign 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
50
public documents shall be governed by Article 89(5) of the Qanun-
e-Shahadat Order, 1984 (“1984 Order”) which reads:  
“89. Proof of other public documents. The 
following public documents may be proved as 
follows: 
… 
(5) Public documents of any other class in a 
foreign country, by the original, or by a copy 
certified by the legal keeper thereof with a 
certificate under the seal of a notary public, or of 
a Pakistan Consul or diplomatic agent, that the 
copy is duly certified by the officer having the 
legal custody of the original, and upon proof of 
the character of the document according to the 
law of foreign country.” 
It may be observed that the process of admitting foreign public 
documents under the 1984 Order is protracted and cumbersome 
because it requires either the production of the original document 
or a copy which is certified not only by the legal keeper of the 
document but also by the Embassy of Pakistan. Further, the 
character of the document needs to be established in accordance 
with the law of the foreign country. Additionally, foreign private 
documents would need to be established through the procedure set 
out in Articles 17 and 79 of the 1984 Order which would require 
that two attesting witnesses from the foreign country enter 
personal appearance for proving the execution of the foreign 
private document. Such a process naturally entails time as the 
foreign evidence needs to pass through red tape. It therefore 
defeats the purpose for which Section 21(g) was inserted into the 
NAB Ordinance i.e., that after State cooperation led to the receipt 
of relevant foreign evidence the same would be directly admissible 
in legal proceedings initiated under the NAB Ordinance without 
fulfilling the onerous conditions of Article 89(5) of the 1984 Order. 
By deleting Section 21(g) from the NAB Ordinance Section 14 of the 
First Amendment has made it near impossible for relevant and 
necessary foreign evidence to be used in the trials of accused 
persons. It therefore offends the Fundamental Rights of the people 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
51
to access justice and protect public property from waste and 
malfeasance. 
Declaration on Section 14 of the First Amendment 
42.   
Section 21(g) is hereby restored in the NAB Ordinance 
for both elected holders of public office and persons in the service 
of Pakistan with effect from the date of commencement of the First 
Amendment for facilitating peoples right to access justice and for 
protecting their public property from squander. Accordingly, 
Section 14 of the First Amendment is struck down for being illegal. 
Section 14 of the Second Amendment  
43.   
Section 14 of the Second Amendment has inserted two 
new provisos to Section 25(b) of the NAB Ordinance. The said 
provision pertains to plea bargains entered into by accused 
persons: 
“25. Voluntary return and plea bargain: … 
(b) Where at any time after the authorization of 
investigation, before or after the commencement 
of the trial or during the pendency of an appeal, 
the accused offers to return to the NAB the assets 
or gains acquired or made by him in the course, 
or as a consequence, of any offence under this 
Ordinance, the Chairman, NAB, may, in his 
discretion, after taking into consideration the 
facts and circumstances of the case, accept the 
offer on such terms and conditions as he may 
consider necessary, and if the accused agrees to 
return to the NAB the amount determined by the 
Chairman, NAB, the Chairman, NAB, shall refer 
the case for the approval of the Court, or as the 
case may be, the Appellate Court and for the 
release of the accused: 
Provided that statement of an accused 
entering into plea bargain or voluntary return 
shall not prejudice case of any other accused: 
Provided further that in case of failure of 
accused to make payment in accordance with the 
plea bargain agreement approved by the Court, 
the agreement of plea bargain shall become 
inoperative 
to 
the 
rights 
of 
the 
parties 
immediately.” 
(emphasis supplied)  
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
52
44.   
For present purposes we are concerned only with the 
second proviso to Section 25(b) of the NAB Ordinance which 
renders a plea bargain entered into by an accused person 
inoperative if the accused fails to make the complete payment as 
approved by the Accountability Court. Read on its own this proviso 
appears to protect the interests of the State by ensuring prompt 
recovery of looted public money and this intention is also reflected 
in the Statement of Objects and Reasons attached to the Second 
Amendment:  
“ …Section 25 is related to protect the interest of 
the Government that in case persons entering 
into plea bargain fail to make payment pursuant 
to the payment approved by the court, the plea 
bargain agreement will become infructuous.” 
45.   
However, 
despite 
the 
benign 
purposes 
behind 
introducing the second proviso to Section 25(b), the actual effect of 
it is that it nullifies Section 25(b) itself which was inserted in the 
NAB Ordinance ‘to facilitate early recovery of the ill-gotten wealth 
through settlement where practicable’ [ref: Asfandyar Wali case 
(supra) at para 267] because it places no restrictions on the 
accused from revoking the plea bargain entered into by him. It is 
established law that whilst a proviso can qualify or create an 
exception to the main section it cannot nullify the same [ref: 
Muhammad Anwar Kurd Vs. State (2011 SCMR 1560) at para 
22]. Further, the second proviso gives the accused an uninhibited 
right to withdraw from a plea bargain without obtaining the 
approval of the Accountability Court which in the first place 
approved the plea bargain. The Court in the case of Asfandyar 
Wali (supra) recognised that plea bargain is in the nature of 
compounding an offence and therefore it should be subject to the 
sanction of the Accountability Court. We see no reason and none 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
53
was advanced by learned counsel for the respondent Federation as 
to why the Accountability Court should be excluded from the 
revocation of an agreement which compounded the offence 
committed by the accused. The exclusion of the Accountability 
Court by the second proviso to Section 25(b) of the NAB Ordinance 
therefore undermines the independence of the Judiciary and is 
violative of Article 175(3) of the Constitution. 
46.   
Moreover, it is an admitted fact that under the proviso 
to Section 15(a) of the NAB Ordinance (disqualification to contest 
elections or to hold public office) an accused person who enters 
into a plea bargain suffers the same consequences as an accused 
person who is convicted of the offence of corruption and corrupt 
practices under Section 9(a). Such consequences are that the 
accused person either forthwith ceases to hold public office, if any, 
held by him or further stands disqualified for a period of ten years 
for seeking or from being elected, chosen, appointed or nominated 
as a member or representative of any public body etc. Therefore, 
allowing an accused person to renege from his plea bargain would 
be tantamount to conferring an unlawful benefit on him i.e., he 
would escape the consequences stipulated in Section 15(a) of the 
NAB Ordinance.  
Declaration on Section 14 of the Second Amendment  
47.   
The second proviso to Section 25(b) is struck down 
from the NAB Ordinance from the date of commencement of the 
Second Amendment for exceeding its purpose by nullifying Section 
25(b), for violating the independence of the Judiciary and for 
enabling accused persons to avoid the consequences of Section 
15(a). As a result, Section 14 of the Second Amendment is declared 
to be void and of no legal effect to this extent.  
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
54
Conclusion  
48.   
On the basis of the above discussion the Court holds: 
i. 
The titled Constitution Petition is maintainable on account of 
violating Articles 9 (security of person), 14 (inviolability of 
dignity of man), 24 (protection of property rights) and 25 
(equality of citizens) of the Constitution and for affecting the 
public at large because unlawful diversion of State resources 
from public development projects to private use leads to 
poverty, declining quality of life and injustice.  
ii. 
Section 3 of the Second Amendment pertaining to Section 
5(o) of the NAB Ordinance that sets the minimum pecuniary 
threshold of the NAB at Rs.500 million and Section 2 of the 
2022 Amendments pertaining to Section 4 of the NAB 
Ordinance which limits the application of the NAB Ordinance 
by creating exceptions for holders of public office are 
declared void ab initio insofar as these concern the 
references filed against elected holders of public office and 
references filed against persons in the service of Pakistan for 
the offences noted in Section 9(a)(vi)-(xii) of the NAB 
Ordinance; 
iii. 
Section 3 of the Second Amendment and Section 2 of the 
2022 Amendments pertaining to Sections 5(o) and 4 of the 
NAB Ordinance are declared to be valid for references filed 
against persons in the Service of Pakistan for the offences 
listed in Section 9(a)(i)-(v) of the NAB Ordinance; 
iv. 
The phrase ‘through corrupt and dishonest means’ inserted 
in Section 9(a)(v) of the NAB Ordinance along with its 
Explanation 
II 
is 
struck 
down 
from 
the 
date 
of 
commencement of the First Amendment for references filed 
against elected holders of public office. To this extent Section 
8 of the First Amendment is declared void; 
v. 
Section 9(a)(v) of the NAB Ordinance, as amended by Section 
8 of the First Amendment, shall be retained for references 
filed against persons in the service of Pakistan;  
vi. 
Section 
14 
and 
Section 
21(g) 
of 
the 
  
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
55
NAB Ordinance are restored from the date of commencement 
of the First Amendment. Consequently, Sections 10 and 14 
of the First Amendment are declared void; and 
vii. 
The second proviso to Section 25(b) of the NAB Ordinance is 
declared to be invalid from the date of commencement of the 
Second Amendment. Therefore, Section 14 of the Second 
Amendment is void to this extent.  
49.   
On account of our above findings, all orders passed by 
the NAB and/or the Accountability Courts placing reliance on the 
above Sections are declared null and void and of no legal effect. 
Therefore, all inquiries, investigations and references which have 
been disposed of on the basis of the struck down Sections are 
restored to their positions prior to the enactment of the 2022 
Amendments and shall be deemed to be pending before the 
relevant fora. The NAB and all Accountability Courts are directed 
to proceed with the restored proceedings in accordance with law. 
The NAB and/or all other fora shall forthwith return the record of 
all such matters to the relevant fora and in any event not later 
than seven days from today which shall be proceeded with in 
accordance with law from the same stage these were at when the 
same were disposed of/closed/returned. 
50.   
The titled Constitution Petition is allowed in these 
terms. 
 
 
Sd/- 
Chief Justice   
 
 
 
 
Sd/- 
Judge 
 
 
I dissent and have attached 
my separate note. 
Sd/- 
Judge 
 
 
 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
56
 
Syed Mansoor Ali Shah J.- I have read the judgment 
authored by the Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan to which my 
learned brother Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan has concurred (“majority 
judgment”) provided to me last night. With great respect, I could 
not make myself agree to it. Due to the paucity of time, I cannot 
fully record reasons for my dissent and leave it for my detailed 
opinion to be recorded later. However, in view of the respect that I 
have for my learned colleagues and for their opinion, I want to 
explain, though briefly, why I am unable to agree with them. 
2.  
 
In my humble opinion, the primary question in this 
case is not about the alleged lopsided amendments introduced in 
the NAB law by the Parliament but about the paramountcy of the 
Parliament, a house of the chosen representatives of about 240 
million people of Pakistan. It is about the constitutional 
importance of parliamentary democracy and separation of powers 
between three organs of the State. It is about the limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Court comprising unelected judges, second 
judging the purpose and policy of an enactment passed by the 
Parliament, without any clear violation beyond reasonable doubt, 
of any of the fundamental rights guaranteed under the 
Constitution or of any other constitutional provision.  
3. 
 
The majority judgment has fallen short, in my humble 
opinion, to recognize the constitutional command that 'the State 
shall exercise its power and authority through the chosen 
representatives of the people' and to recognize the principle of 
trichotomy of powers, which is the foundation of parliamentary 
democracy. The majority has fallen prey to the unconstitutional 
objective of a parliamentarian, of transferring a political debate on 
the purpose and policy of an enactment from the Houses of the 
Parliament to the courthouse of the Supreme Court. Without 
setting out a clear and objective test for determining how the 
claimed right to have accountability of the parliamentarians is an 
integral part of any of the fundamental rights guaranteed under 
the Constitution, the majority judgment through a long winding 
conjectural path of far-fetched “in turn” effects has tried hard to 
“ultimately” reach an apprehended violation of the fundamental 
rights. The majority judgment has also fallen short to appreciate 
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
57
that what Parliament has done, Parliament can undo; the 
legislative power of the Parliament is never exhausted. If the 
Parliament can enact the NAB law, it can also repeal the entire law 
or amend the same.  
4.   
 
For these and further reasons to be recorded in my 
detailed opinion later, with great respect, I disagree with my 
learned brothers and dismiss this petition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sd/- 
     Judge 
 
Islamabad, 
15th September, 2023. 
Approved for reporting. 
 
  
Const.P.21/2022 etc. 
58
Order of the Bench 
By majority of 2:1 (Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah dissenting) 
Constitution Petition No.21 of 2022 is allowed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Sd/- 
    Chief Justice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Sd/-  
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Sd/-  
Judge 
Islamabad  
Announced on 15.09.2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
Sd/-  
                      Chief Justice  
  
      
             
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING. 
