SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
(Appellate Jurisdiction) 
 
PRESENT: 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
Justice Musarrat Hilali 
Criminal Petition No.188-P of 2023 
[Against the judgment dated 10.11.2023 passed by the Peshawar High Court, 
Peshawar in Crl. Misc. (BA) No.3997-P/2023] 
 
Kashif  
…Petitioner(s) 
Versus 
Imran and another 
…Respondent(s) 
 
For the Petitioner(s) 
: Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani, ASC 
 
 
 
Complainant 
: In person 
 
 
 
For the State 
: Mr. Altaf Khan, Addl. AG KP 
 
 
 
Date of Hearing 
: 17.01.2024 
 
 
 
 
O R D E R 
Qazi Faez Isa, CJ. Learned counsel states that FIR No.1154 was 
registered at Police Station Kalu Khan on 20 December 2022 wherein 
a group of unknown persons were mentioned for committing dacoity 
in the complainant’s house. Learned counsel submits that the two 
persons whose description was provided in the FIR did not match the 
description of the petitioner and that he was falsely implicated as he 
was already in the illegal detention of the Police. 
2. 
Pursuant to notice issued on 5 December 2023 the 
complainant is present and seeks time to engage a counsel. This is a 
bail matter where the accused is in Jail and sufficient notice has 
been given, therefore, the complainant’s request for adjournment 
cannot be accommodated. The learned Additional Advocate General 
(‘AAG’) opposes bail.  
3. 
The FIR states that three sub-machine guns (SMGs)/7.62 bore 
weapons and one 9 mm pistol, gold ornaments and mobile phones 
were stolen when the dacoity was committed. In view of the fact that 
the description of the petitioner was not mentioned in the FIR, this 
brings into question the identification parade. And none of the stolen 
goods were recovered from the petitioner which makes this case one 
of further inquiry. Therefore, the petitioner is granted bail in the sum 
of fifty thousand rupees (Rs.50,000) upon provision of bail bonds and 
one surety in the said amount to the satisfaction of the Trial Court by 
1. Crl.P.188-P of 2023.doc 
- 2 - 
 
 
 
converting this petition into an appeal and allowed by setting aside 
the impugned order. 
4. 
During the hearing the Investigating Officer (‘IO’) was asked 
whether he had inquired from the complainant or the owner of the 
stolen firearms to produce their licences and we were told that this 
was not done; a sad reflection on the manner in which the 
investigation was carried out. We then asked the complainant 
whether the stolen firearms were licensed and he produced photo 
copy of a piece of paper, which is reproduced hereunder: 
‘TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN 
Mr. Haleem Khan s/o Hakeem Khan r/o Bali Khel 
Ismaile, District Swabi, CNIC No. 16202-0972044-7 to 
carry his own Weapon 7.62 Bore (Rifle) No. 2523103 for 
his self protection. He may be provided all legal help 
when needed in the jurisdiction of his fields. He will not 
display the weapon nor shall violate the provisions of 
section 144 Cr.PC. 
 
(N.B not transferable not to be photo stated 
Validity 03 months with effect from the date of 
issue 23 June 2014 
-sd- 
(Muhammad Saeed) PSP 
Deputy Inspector General of Police, 
Mardan Region-I, Mardan 
No.1891/PA 
Dated 23.6.2014’ 
We cannot ignore the above document, which had been produced 
before us in Court, which purports to be a license of a sub-machine 
gun (SMG) which is a prohibited bore weapon. Notifications are also 
issued by the government exempting the requirement of obtaining 
licenses or permitting licenses for prohibited bore weapons to certain 
categories of persons, including Chief Justices, Judges, Ministers, 
Parliamentarians, as mentioned in Schedule I of the Arms Rules, 
1924.  
5. 
The above has raised the following questions:  
(1) 
Under what legal authority had the Deputy Inspector 
General of Police, Mardan Region-I, Mardan issued the 
said document which purports to be a license to carry an 
SMG, which is a prohibited bore weapon?  
(2) 
Whether licenses of SMG and other prohibited bore 
weapons can be issued? 
1. Crl.P.188-P of 2023.doc 
- 3 - 
 
 
 
(3) 
If the answer to the above is in the affirmative, the 
applicable law and procedure, and the person(s) who can 
issue exemptions/licenses? 
(4) 
The number of licenses, including permits, issued with 
regard to SMGs and other prohibited bore weapons. 
(5) 
The approximate number of SMGs and other prohibited 
bore weapons in private use in the country? 
(6) 
Whether exempting certain categories of persons or 
granting them the right to obtain licenses for  SMGs and 
other prohibited bore weapons accords with Article 25 of 
the Constitution, which mandates that all citizens are 
equal before the law? 
(7) 
Whether enabling the easy availability of SMGs and other 
prohibited bore weapons accords with Article 9, the 
Fundamental 
Right 
to 
life 
guaranteed 
by 
the 
Constitution?    
 
6. 
The office is directed to make a separate file and title it ‘Sub-
Machine Guns and other Prohibited Bore Weapons’ and register it as 
a constitution petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution with 
regard to paragraph 4 onwards. The matter prima facie is one of 
public importance with regard to the enforcement of Fundamental 
Rights, including Articles 9 and 25 of the Constitution, therefore, it 
be placed for consideration of the Committee constituted under 
Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023.  
7. 
 In the meanwhile notices be issued to the Secretary Interior, 
Home Secretaries and Inspector Generals of Police of the provinces, 
each of whom should separately submit their replies to the noted 
questions within one month. Notices be also issued to the Attorney-
General for Pakistan and the Advocate-Generals of the provinces in 
terms of Order XXVIIA of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908.   
   
 
 
 
 
 
Chief Justice 
 
 
 
ISLAMABAD 
17 January 2024 
Judge 
 
Syed Farhan Ali 
Judge 
 
Approved for reporting 
 
 
