SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
(Appellate Jurisdiction) 
 
Bench-II: 
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah 
Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik 
 
Crl.P.588-L/2023 
(Against the order of Lahore High Court, Lahore 
dated 17.04.2023, passed in Crl. Misc. No.77194-B of 2022) 
 
Syeda Ayesha Subhani 
... Petitioner 
Versus 
The State, etc. 
… Respondents 
 
For the petitioner/complainant:  
Mr. Jawad Zafar, ASC. 
For the State: 
 
 
 
Raja Shafqat Khan Abbasi, DAG. 
Saqib Hafeez, A.D. FIA, Cyber Crimes, 
Lahore.  
For the respondent/accused:  
Mr. Munir Ahmed Bhatti, ASC. 
a/w Syed Junaid Arshad,  
the respondent/accused, in person. 
Date of Hearing:  
 
 
28 August 2023 
ORDER 
Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. Through this petition, the 
petitioner/complainant seeks leave to appeal against an order of the 
Lahore High Court, dated 17.04.2023, whereby the High Court has 
allowed the post-arrest bail application of the respondent/accused and 
granted him bail on the statutory ground of delay in the conclusion of 
the trial. The petitioner prays for setting aside the order of the High 
Court and cancellation of the bail granted to the respondent. 
2. 
 
Briefly, the factual background of the case is that in the 
earlier round, the post-arrest bail application of the respondent was 
dismissed by the Lahore High Court by its order dated 11.01.2021, on 
merits as well as on the statutory ground of delay. The High Court, 
however, also directed the trial court to conclude the trial within a period 
of 30 days from the date of receipt of that order. The respondent, through 
a petition for leave to appeal, challenged the said order of the High Court 
before this Court, but on perusing the report of the trial court as to who 
caused the delay in the conclusion of the trial, learned counsel for the 
respondent did not press the petition, and the same was disposed of by 
Crl. P. 588-L of 2023 
 
 
 
2
this Court on 24 February 2021 with the observation that the trial court 
would decide the case expeditiously. 
3. 
 
The trial of the respondent, however, could not be concluded 
till 15 September 2022, when the respondent filed a fresh post-arrest bail 
application in the trial court, on the statutory ground of delay in the 
conclusion of the trial. The trial court dismissed the application of the 
respondent on 11 November 2022, with the observation that the earlier 
post-arrest bail application on the statutory ground of delay stood 
dismissed by the High Court as well as by the Supreme Court; therefore, 
the fresh application on the same ground was not maintainable. The 
respondent then went up to the High Court, and by the impugned order 
of 17 April 2023, the High Court allowed the second post-arrest bail 
application of the respondent on the statutory ground of delay in the 
conclusion of the trial; hence, the present petition. 
4. 
 
We have heard the arguments of the learned counsel for the 
parties and examined the cases cited by them, as well as, the record of 
the case.  
5. 
 
The report of the trial court submitted to the High Court 
shows that from April 2022 to April 2023 when the High Court granted 
the respondent bail, for a period of one year, the conclusion of the trial 
was mainly hindered by a defect in the functioning of the video-link 
system in the jail through which the respondent had to appear before the 
trial court. Other than this, on a few hearings during this year, the 
respondent could not appear because he was seriously ill and was 
hospitalized while on some other hearings when the respondent appeared 
the witnesses of the prosecution were not present. Thus, the respondent 
was not at fault for the delay in the conclusion of the trial at least in the 
year preceding the date on which he was granted bail by the High Court. 
The only question of law that requires determination, therefore, is 
whether the delay in the conclusion of the trial that occurs for no fault of 
the accused in the year following the rejection of his first bail application 
on the statutory ground of delay, can be considered a “fresh ground”, not 
earlier available to him, for entertaining his second bail application, 
within the meaning and scope of that term as elaborated in Nazir 
Ahmed1.   
                                                
1 Nazir Ahmed v. State PLD 2014 SC 241. 
Crl. P. 588-L of 2023 
 
 
 
3
6.  
 
The present case does not involve any offence punishable 
with death.2 And as per the 3rd proviso to Section 497(1), CrPC, which 
provides the statutory ground of delay in the conclusion of the trial for 
granting post-arrest bail, a person accused of any offence not punishable 
with death is to be released on bail as of right if he has been detained for 
such offence for a continuous period exceeding one year and the delay in 
the conclusion of the trial has not been occasioned by his any act or 
omission or any other person acting on his behalf nor does his case fall 
within the 4th proviso to Section 497(1), Cr.P.C.   
7. 
 
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that 
once a bail application of the accused on the statutory ground of delay is 
dismissed, holding the accused responsible for causing the delay in the 
conclusion of the trial, his second bail application on the same ground 
for any subsequent period cannot be entertained. The argument does not 
appeal to us. Firstly, the entitlement of an accused to post-arrest bail on 
the statutory ground of delay in the conclusion of the trial is time-based. 
If the delay exceeds a year for no fault of the accused, in offences 
punishable other than death, the right of the accused to post-arrest bail 
ripens. This right continues to ripen for each period of one year starting 
from the arrest of the accused if he satisfies the court that he is not at 
fault for the delay in a particular period of one year unless his case falls 
within the 4th proviso to Section 497(1), Cr.P.C. Secondly, denying this 
recurring right to post-arrest bail to the accused would, in our opinion, 
amount to giving the prosecution a license to delay the conclusion of the 
trial for an unlimited period of time after the dismissal of the first bail 
application of the accused on the statutory ground of delay. The accused 
would, in such an eventuality, be left confined as an undertrial prisoner 
for an unlimited period of time at the mercy of the prosecution to 
conclude the trial as and when it pleases to do so. Thirdly, the accused 
shall have no incentive to attend the trial regularly and cooperate in the 
early conclusion thereof, after the dismissal of his first bail application, if 
his subsequent orderly conduct cannot entitle him to post-arrest bail 
despite non-conclusion of the trial for no fault of his in the next one year. 
Such a situation would be absolutely antithetical to the constitutional 
scheme of fundamental rights and make a mockery of the rights to 
liberty, fair trial and dignity of the accused guaranteed under the 
Constitution.  
                                                
2 Offences alleged are punishable under Section 4, 16, 20, 21 and 24 of the Prevention of Electronic Crimes 
Act 2016 and Section 500, 120-B, 109 of the Pakistan Penal Code 1860. 
Crl. P. 588-L of 2023 
 
 
 
4
8. 
 
It is a well-settled principle of interpretation in our 
jurisdiction that if two interpretations of a provision of a criminal statute 
are reasonably possible, the one that is favourable to the accused, not 
the prosecution, should be preferred.3 As the statutory right to be 
released on bail on the ground of delay in the conclusion of the trial flows 
from the constitutional rights to liberty, fair trial and dignity guaranteed 
under Articles 9, 10A and 14 of the Constitution of Pakistan, the 
provisions of the 3rd proviso must be fashioned in a manner that is 
progressive and expansive of these rights of the accused, who is still 
under trial, and his guilt being not yet proven, has in his favour the 
presumption of innocence.  
9. 
 
The purpose and objective of the 3rd proviso, as observed by 
this Court in Shakeel Shah4, is to ensure that the trial of an accused is 
conducted expeditiously and that the pre-conviction detention of a 
person accused of an offence not punishable with death does not extend 
beyond the period of one year. If the trial in such an offence is not 
concluded within a period of one year for no fault of the accused, the 
statutory right to be released on bail ripens in his favour unless his case 
falls within any of the clauses of the 4th proviso. This right of the 
accused creates a corresponding duty upon the prosecution to conclude 
the trial within the specified period of one year. If any act or omission of 
the accused hinders the conclusion of the trial within a period of one 
year, no such right will accrue to him and he would not be entitled to be 
released on bail on the statutory ground of delay in conclusion of the 
trial. But if after the rejection of his plea for bail on this ground, the 
accused corrects himself and abstains from doing any such act or 
omission in the year following such rejection but the prosecution fails to 
perform its duty in concluding the trial within the specified period of one 
year, a fresh right, that is to say, a fresh ground, would accrue in his 
favour. The 3rd proviso to Section 497, CrPC, thus, becomes operative as 
and when a period of one year passes but the trial is not concluded for 
no fault of the accused. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the delay in 
the conclusion of the trial that occurs for no fault of the accused in the 
year following the rejection of his bail application on the statutory ground 
of delay, is to be considered a “fresh ground”, not earlier available to him, 
for entertaining his second bail application, within the meaning and 
scope of that term as elaborated in Nazir Ahmed. 
                                                
3 Bashir v. State 1998 SCMR 1794; Shahista Bibi v. Superintendent Jail PLD 2015 SC 15; Waris Ali v. 
State 2017 SCMR 1572; Province Of Punjab v. Muhammad Rafique PLD 2018 SC 178; Sahib Ulah v. 
State 2022 SCMR 1806. 
4 Shakeel Shah v. State 2022 SCMR 1. 
Crl. P. 588-L of 2023 
 
 
 
5
10. 
 
The High Court has arrived at the right decision but has 
been rather remiss in elaborating the entitlement of the respondent to 
maintain a second post-arrest bail on the fresh statutory ground of delay 
that had arisen due to the delay in the conclusion of the trial for his no 
fault in a subsequent period of one year, which was earlier found not 
available to him for a previous period of one year. However, for the above 
reason, we find that the High Court has acted correctly in entertaining 
the second bail application of the respondent on the fresh ground of 
delay in the conclusion of the trial for a period of one year after the 
dismissal of his earlier bail application. There is no legal justification for 
interference by this Court in the impugned order. The petition is found 
meritless; it is therefore dismissed and the leave to appeal is declined. 
However, as the trial in the case has been pending for long, we direct the 
trial court to conclude the trial within a period of three months from the 
date of receipt of this order.   
 
 
 
Islamabad, 
28 August 2023. 
Approved for reporting. 
Iqbal/* 
 
Judge 
 
 
Judge 
 
 
 
 
