IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
(Appellate Jurisdiction)

PRESENT:
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar
Mr. Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi

Criminal Petition No.31-K of 2022
(Against the order dated 14.02.2022, passed by the High Court of Sindh, Bench
at Sukkur in Criminal Miscellaneous Application No.S-644 of 2020}

Munawar Alam Khan ',.. Petitioner
Versus
Qurban Ali Mallano and others .. Respondents
Petitioner : In person
For the Respondents : NLR.
Date of Hearing : 08.04.2024,
JUDGMENT

Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi, J. Through the captioned
petition filed under Article 185(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic
Republic of Pakistan, 1973, the petitioner, who appears in person,
has challenged the legality of order dated 14.02.2022 passed by
the High. Court of Sindh, bench at Sukkur (High Court) whereby his
Criminal _ Miscellaneous Application No.S-644 of 2020 was
dismissed while maintaining the order dated 21.10.2022 passed by

- Additional Sessions Judge-II, Sukkur/Justice of Peace (rial Court) in
Criminal Miscellaneous Application No.2038 of 2019 filed under
Sections 22-A and 22-B Cr.P.C.

2. Facts as per the record are that both the parties to the
lis belong to the legal fraternity and are contesting bar elections on
yearly basis against each other. The animosity amongst them is an

admitted fact. In earlier elections both the groups resorted to a
2-Criminal Petition No.31-K of 2022

brawl. After the incident, the petitioner approached the police for
lodging an FIR against the accused/respondents but the same was
not so done.

3. The applicant in person states that both the Courts
below have not taken into consideration the facts of the case in its
true perspective; that the impugned order suffers from misreading

or non-reading, therefore not tenable in the eyes of law; that while

pursuing his application filed under Sections 22-A and 22-B
Cr.P.C. before the trial Court, the respondents/accused assaulted
him.

4. Having heard the petitioner and scanned the material
available on the record, we observe that there are many precedents
regarding misuse of provisions of Sections 22-A and 22-B Cr.P.C.
and it is the prime duty of the Court that such misuse be taken
care of and application filed should not be lightly entertained and
decided in a mechanical manner for issuing direction to the police
to lodge an FIR, conduct investigation in the matter and prosecute
the accused. It is a settled principle of law that each and every case
is to be decided on its own peculiar facts and circumstances and
inference in this regard can be drawn from the cases reported as

Rai Ashraf and others versus Muhammad Saleem Bhatti and

others (PLD 2010 SC 691), Trustees of the Port of Karachi

versus Muhammad Saleem (1994 SCMR 2213) and The State

versus Mushtaq Ahmed (PLD 1973 SC 418).

5. It reflects from the record that before the High Court, a
question was asked from the learned counsel for the petitioner
whether respondent No.1, namely Mr. Qurban Ali Mallano, was
present when the occurrence took place, he answered in the

negative. The allegation levelled against respondent No.1 is that on
2-Criminal Petition No.31-K of 2022

his instigation respondent No.2, namely Rahib Mallano, who is his
brother-in-law, has committed the offence. Even otherwise from
the comments filed by medical officer before the trial Court, it has
been found that he has provided treatment to the petitioner but no
medical certificate was issued in this regard on the ground that the
petitioner has failed to furnish the police letter.

6. A common culture prevailing with our society and
often chosen by the legal fraternity is to settle the disputes by
converting them into criminal prosecution against each other
which, in our candid view, is apparent on the record owing to the
reason that there are other cases running in Court inter se the
parties. After having received kicks and fists blows at the hands of
the respondents, the petitioner has remained successful in seeking
a direction for lodging an FIR from the trial Court, whereas FIR
| bearing No.98 of 2019 was also lodged against the petitioner in a
similar context by some Advocates of accused/respondents’ group.

7. A larger bench of this Court in the case reported as

Mst. Sughran Bibi versus The State (PLD 2018 SC 595} has
elaborately discussed the proposition qua lodging of an F.I.R,
relevant portions wherefrom in order to resolve the controversy at

hand read as under:-

“9. The whole gambit of controversy in hand revolves around the
import and application of Section 154 of Cr.P.C. hence for ready
reference it will be useful to reproduce the same as under:

"154. Information in cognizable cases.- Every information
relating to the commission of a cognizable offence if given orally
to an officer-incharge of a police station, shall be reduced in
writing by him or under his direction and be read over to the
informant; and every such information, whether given in writing or
reduced to writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person
giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be
kept by such officer in such form as the Provincial Government
may prescribe in this behalf."

10. As could be seen from the plain reading of above reproduced
provision of law, the requirement of Section 154 Cr.P.C. is to enter

(wey
2-Criminal Petition No.31-K of 2022

every information of commission of a cognizable offence, whether
given orally or in writing to the officer-in-charge of the police
station, which shall then be reduced into writing and signed by the
person giving it and the substance thereof shall be entered in a
book to be kept by such officer in the form prescribed by the
Provincial Government in this behalf’ Meaning thereby, that it is
not a legal requirement for provider of such information to
canvass the whole scene of occurrence of a cognizable offence
giving description and details of accused, details af weapons used
by them, their specific role, motive behind the occurrence, and the
names of eye-witnesses etc. But it is a matter of common
experience that usually the entries made in Section 154 Cr.P.C.
book, as per practice, contain invariably all such details so much
so that in the ordinary parlance/sense it is considered as the gist of
the prosecution case against the accused. In such state of affairs, if
a collusive, mala fide or concocted FIR, registered at the instance
of some individual with some ulterior motive, is taken as
sacrosanct, it is likely to divert the whole course of investigation in
a wrong direction and spoil the entire prosecution case on that
premise. The Court while considering the crucial point of
registration of another FIR cannot remain oblivious of these
ground realities so as to non-suit the aggrieved party from
agitating his grievance in an honest manner, or ensure regulating
proper investigation of a crime in the right direction, or apprehend
the real culprits and brought them before the Court of law for
Justice.

11. Though our criminal legal system proceeds on the presumption
of honest, God fearing and fair police officers, impartial and
honest investigation system, but this is far from reality in the
society we live in. In such circumstances when the Courts feel that
due to mala fide, dishonest, colourful and motivated acts or
omissions, entire investigation of the crime has been misled or it is
going to be misled and on that account the case of the prosecution
is likely to fail, then they are not denuded of their powers to order
recording of another FIR disclosing a different version to check
such nefarious design meant to save the real culprits vis-a-vis
misleading the investigation/prosecution, at any appropriate stage
of the proceedings. However, where need be, such powers are to
be exercised with extreme care and caution and not in a routine
manner so as to merely fulfill the wish of an individual who, as per
his whims, is not satisfied either with the contents of earlier FIR or
the direction of investigation based thereon or wants registration
of another FIR with some ulterior motive. It is more so important
in the circumstances when the procedure of direct complaint under
Section 200, Cr.P.C. is also provided to meet such eventualities.
However, it may be clarified here that there may be circumstances
where registration of another FIR will be the only proper course
as adopting the alternate course provided in Section 200, Cr.P.C.
may not be equally efficacious and effective for the aggrieved
person. The case law on the subject, which has been referred to
above, lend support to the view that provisions of Section 154,
2-Criminal Petition No.31-K of 2022

Cr.P.C. are to be read in a pragmatic, holistic and realistic
manner in order to ensure that its true spirit and object is achieved
and it is not abused at the hands of individuals or police, who may
be adamant to make mockery of this system. It is for these reasons
that no definite principle can be laid down barring the registration
of another FIR.

15. The confusion prevailing in the matter of registration of
multiple FIRs in respect of the same offence stems from a
misunderstanding that an FIR is the version of the incideni
reported to the police whereas the legal position is that an FIR to
be registered under section 154, Cr.P.C. is only an information
about commission of a cognizable offence and not an information
about the circumstances in which such offence was committed or
by whom it was committed. If the information supplied to the police
not only reports commission of a cognizable offence but also
contains a story as to how and by whom the offence was committed
then such further information is just a version of the informant and
during the investigation the investigating officer is free to entertain
any number of versions advanced by any number of persons and it
is his duty "to discover the actual facts of the case and to arrest the
real offender or offenders. He shall not commit himseif
prematurely to any view of the facts for or against any person" as
mandated by Rule 25.2(3) of the Police Rules, 1934 reproduced
above, All subsequent or divergent versions of the same
occurrence or the persons involved therein are to be received,
recorded and investigated by the investigating officer in the same
"case" which is based upon the one and only FIR registered in
respect of the relevant "offence" in the prescribed book kept at the
local police station. ;
16. Now we turn to the judgments rendered by this Court so far on
the issue of registration of multiple FIRs in respect of commission
of the same cognizable offence depicting different versions of the
same incident. In the case of Jamshed Ahmad yv. Muhammad
Akram Khan and another (1975 SCMR 149) this Court had found
the High Court to be justified in refusing to order registration of a
second FIR because an FIR already stood registered in respect of
"the same transaction" and the case was already under
investigation.

17, In the case of Kaura v. The State and others (1983 SCMR 436)
this Court had categorically held that a case had already been
registered through an FIR and, therefore, registration of another
FIR “was not called for" merely because the subsequent
information supplied to the police contained a divergent version of
the same incident, It was observed by this Court that "the ball had
already been set rolling and the police was not only competent but
also duty bound to unearth the true facts and trace the real
culprits."

18. The subsequent case of Wajid Ali Khan Durani and others y.
Government of Sindh and others (2001 SCMR 1556), however,

A
2-Criminal Petition No.31-K of 2022

struck a different note and, therefore, the same requires a close
scrutiny. It was alleged in that case that the two FIRs already
registered with the local police in respect of the same incident "did
not reflect the true facts” and, therefore, another FIR ought to be
registered "disclosing the true facts of the incident" and in that
backdrop the High Court had ordered the local police to register a
third FIR in respect of the selfsame incident. When the said order
of the High Court was assailed before this Court it was upheld and
maintained simply by observing that "the learned High Court in
the circumstances of the case, was within its jurisdiction in gtving
the direction to the police for registering another F.LR. at the
instance of the aggrieved widows of the deceased. Moreover,
admittedly, since lodging of the third F.LR., regular challan has
been submitted in the Court in which the petitioners have been
named as accused persons and the trial is yet to take place." This
Court had gone on to observe that "Similarly, the contention that
the learned High Court has not followed the view expressed by this
Court in 1983 SCMR 436 is misconceived, as perusal of the
impugned judgment would also show that in the circumstances
pointed out in the judgment the learned High Court had correctly
appreciated the views expressed in several cases by the superior
Courts including the case referred to by the counsel in giving the
direction for registering another F.LR." A careful examination of
the said judgment handed down by this Court shows three things.
firstly, it was presumed without referring to any legal provision cr
basis that the High Court had the jurisdiction to order registration
of a third FIR in respect of the same incident; secondly, the third
FIR had already been registered on the basis of the impugned
order passed by the High Court and upon completion of the
investigation on the basis of the third FIR a Challan had already
been submitted before the trial court for holding a regular trial of
the accused persons implicated through the third FIR; and, thirdly,
the judgment passed by this Court earlier on in the case of Kaura
y. The State and others (1983 SCMR 436) had not been correcily
appreciated. We understand, and it is submitted with great respect,
that in that case this Court did not feel persuaded to interfere in
the matter primarily because the case had already reached the
trial court after completion of the investigation stage and it was
presumably on account of that development that this Court had
paid little attention to the legal issues involved in registration of
multiple FIRs in respect of the same incident. It, thus, appears to
us that the said judgment had proceeded on the basis of its own
peculiar facts and, therefore, the same could not readily be treated
as the law declared.

19. The case of Mst. Anwar Begum v. Station House Officer, Police
Station Kalri West, Karachi and 12 others (PLD 2005 SC 297) was
a case in which the High Court had refused to order registration of
a second FIR regarding an incident in respect of which an FIR
already stood registered with the local police but this Court issued
such an order. In this case a second FIR containing a different
yersion was ordered by this Court to be registered because it was
found that "the veracity and truthfulness of FIR. lodged Sy

lon}
-2-Criminal Petition No.31-K of 2022

respondent Muhammad Yousuf, the Manager of the Company,
became highly doubtful and the petitioner was right in asking for
registration of another FIR. at her own version". The
investigation of the case was still in progress when this Court had
observed in that case that the veracity and truthfulness of the FIR
originally registered was "highly doubtful" which observation, it is
submitted with deep reverence, was not only presumptuous but
also premature. Apart from that while issuing an order regarding
registration of a second FIR this Court had referred to the
judgment of this Court passed in the case of Wajid Ali Khan
Durani and others v. Government of Sindh and others (2001
SCMR 1556), it had made no mention of the judgments rendered
by this Court in the cases of Jamshed Ahmad v. Muhammad Akram
Khan and another (1975 SCMR 149) and Kaura v. The State and
others (1983 SCMR 436) and it had placed reliance upon the case
of Muhammad Ishaque v. S.P. Jaffarabad and another (PLJ 1998

Quetta 1) decided by a High Court. Unfortunately no provision of

the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 or of the Police Rules, 1934
was discussed in that judgment and as a matter of fact no
discussion of the relevant law had taken place in the said judgment
of this Court at all.

20. The last of the precedent cases from this Court is the case of

Ali Muhammad and others y. Syed Bibi and others (PLD 2016 SC
484) wherein the High Court had ordered registration of a second
FIR containing a different version of the same incident and this
Court had upheld that order of the High Court. In that judgment
this Court had observed in the very beginning that "Regarding this
incident, an FIR was earlier lodged with misleading and incorrect
statement of facts, therefore, she filed an application under Section
22-A Cr.P.C. before the Justice of Peace/Sessions Judge Pishin
with the following assertions: ---". With utmost respect, this Court
could have been more circumspect before making an observation
about misleading or incorrect nature of the facts asserted in the
original FIR especially when the stage of the case was premature
and the investigation of the case was still in progress. This Cours
had then gone on to notice the case of Kaura v. The State ane

others (1983 SCMR 436) but unfortunately the ratio decidendi of

that case was not even adverted to. It appears that the main
consideration persuading this Court in favour of registration of «
second FIR about the same incident was what was observed in the
following paragraph of the judgment:

"8. We have considered submissions of the learned ASC for tl the
appellants on short controversy involved in the matter relating to
registration of another FIR. In the instant case, perusal of contents
of the earlier FIR lodged at the instance of Ali Muhammad
Defedar Levies on 09.06.2010 and the contents of other FIR
lodged by Respondent No.1 on 27.08.2015, in terms of the
impugned judgment, reveals two entirely different and conflicting
stories about the actual occurrence. It is, thus, obvious that in case
prosecution leads its evidence on the basis of contents of earlier
FIR and the investigation made on that basis, then from no stretch
of imagination the grievance of Respondent No.1, attributing

a
i

2-Criminal Petition No.31-K of 2022

criminal liability of whole occurrence to the complainant and his
party ("the appellants" herein), could be considered or adjudicated
upon by the Court.---"

It appears that the Court was not properly assisted on that
occasion and it was erroneously made to understand that the
police are to investigate the case only on the lines asserted in an
FIR and then it is to lead evidence before the trial court only in
terms of the accusations made in the FIR. As already noticed in the
preceding paragraphs of the present judgment, the scheme of the
law is totally the opposite of it and according to the same after
commencement of an investigation on the basis of an FIR the
investigation officer is to collect every possible information about
the facts and circumstances of the case, he is to receive or record
any information in that regard becoming available from any
source whatsoever, he is not to prematurely commit himself to any
particular version of the incident and after finding out the actual
facts the final report under section 173, Cr.P.C. is to be submitted
not in terms of the allegations levelled in the FIR but in
accordance with the actual facts discovered during the
investigation.

25. During the course of hearing of this petition we had inquired
Jrom the petitioner as to why she was insisting upon registration .of
a separate FIR in respect of her version of the incident especially
when she had already instituted a private complaint containing her
version of the incident and the accused persons in her private
complaint had already been summoned by the trial court to face a
trial.and a Charge had been framed against them. In response to
that query the petitioner had categorically stated that she wanted
the accused persons in her version of the incident to be arrested
and recoveries to be affected from them which was not possible
through the medium of a private complaint. Such understanding of
the law on the part of the petitioner, which understanding is also
shared by a large section of the legal community in our country,
has been found by us to be erroneous and fallacious. By virtue of
the provisions of section 202(1), Cr.P.C. a court seized of a private
complaint can "direct an inquiry or investigation to be made by
any Justice of the Peace or by a police officer or by such other
person as it thinks fit" If in a given case the court seized of a
private complaint deems it appropriate to direct an investigation to
be carried out in respect of the allegations made then the powers
available during an investigation, enumerated in Part V, Chapter
XIV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 read with section
4(1)() of the same Code, include the powers to arrest an accused
person and to affect recovery from his possession or at his
instance. Such powers of the investigating officer or the
investigating person recognize no distinction. between an
investigation in a State case and an investigation in a complaint
case.
2-Criminal Petition No.31-K of 2022

26. The impression entertained by the petitioner that if a separate
FIR is registered in terms of her version of the incident then the
accused persons nominated by, her would automatically be
arrested has been found by us to be not only misconceived but also
discomforting. The law does not permit arrest of a person merely

on the basis of a bald allegation levelled against him.

27. As a result of the discussion made above we declare the legal
position as follows:

(i) According to section 154, Cr.P.C. an FIR is only the first
information to the local police about commission of a cognizable
offence. For instance, an information received from any source
that a murder has been committed in such and such village is to be
a valid and sufficient basis for registration of an FIR in thai
regard. ‘
(ii) If the information received by the local police about
commission of a cognizable offence also contains a version as to
how the relevant offence was committed, by whom it was
committed and in which background it was committed then that
version of the incident is only the version of the informant and
nothing more and such version is not to be unreservedly accepted
by the investigating officer as the truth or the whole truth.

(iii) Upon registration of an FIR a criminal "case" comes into
existence and that case is to be assigned a number and such case
carries the same number till the final decision of the matter.

(iv) During the investigation conducted after registration of an FIR
the investigating officer may record any number of versions of the
same incident brought to his notice by different persons whicn
yersions are to be recorded by him under section 161, Cr.P.C. in
the same case. No separate FIR is to be recorded for any new
version of the same incident brought to the notice of the
investigating officer during the investigation of the case.

(v) During the investigation the investigating officer is obliged tc
investigate the matter from all possible angles while keeping in
view all the versions of the incident brought to his notice and, as
required by Rule 25.2(3) of the Police Rules, 1934 "It is the duty of
an investigating officer to find out the truth of the matter under
investigation. His object shail be to discover the actual facts of the
case and to arrest the real offender or offenders. He shall not
commit himself prematurely to any view of the facts for or againsi
any person."

(vi) Ordinarily no person is to be arrested straightaway only
because he has been nominated as an accused person in an FIR or
in any other version of the incident brought to the notice of the
investigating officer by any person until the investigating officer
feels satisfied that sufficient justification exists for his arrest and
for such justification he is to be guided by the relevant provisions
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 and the Police Rules
1934. According to the relevant provisions of the said Code and ,
LJ

2-Criminal Petition No.31-K of 2022

the Rules a suspect is not to be arrested straightaway or as a
matter of course and, unless the situation on the ground so
warrants, the arrest is to be deferred till such time that sufficient
material or evidence becomes’ available on the record of
investigation prima facie satisfying the investigating officer
regarding correctness of the allegations levelled against such
suspect or regarding his involvement in the crime in issue.

(vii) Upon conclusion of the investigation the report to be
submitted under section 173, Cr.P.C is to be based upon the actual
Jacts discovered during the investigation irrespective of the version
of the incident advanced by the first informant or any other version
brought to the notice of the investigating officer by any other
person.”

8. Under the circumstances, we are clear in our mind
that the trial Court has taken into consideration all material
aspects of the matter, either legal or factual, and has rightiy
dismissed the application filed by the petitioner under Sections 22-
A(6)(1) and 22-B Cr.P.C. on the ground that the same is tainted
with mala fide, that order has been upheld by the High Court
through the impugned order. The petitioner has failed to persuade
us to interfere in the well-reasoned orders passed by the fora
below. |

9. No misreading or non-reading as well as infirmity or
illegality on the record has been noticed. Consequently, the
petition being bereft of merit is dismissed. Leave to appeal is

declined.

em

paths
arachi, the

8 April, 2024

hulam Raza/*

A onlantaa FOR REPORTING
G
